
== Development plans and future ==

In July 2007, Burnley revealed plans for a £20 million redevelopment of Turf Moor. The plans also included the creation of a youth academy at the club's training facility at Gawthorpe Hall in nearby Padiham. The plans were detailed in six phases. In the first phase it was planned to move the changing rooms to the corner between the James Hargreaves Stand and the Jimmy McIlroy Stand. The second phase included the demolition of the Cricket Field Stand, a new stand to be built at that end of the ground that would incorporate a hotel, a restaurant and a newly constructed cricket pavilion, and would be able to accommodate 2,500 fans. The redevelopments also included the construction of a multi-storey car park adjacent to the stadium. Other planned improvements included a new club superstore and other retail outlets, and new business offices on the site of the at the time located club shop. Revealed in the fifth phase was a transformation of the Bob Lord Stand. The development of a second tier on the Bob Lord stand was later revealed by Burnley chief executive Paul Fletcher, taking the anticipated capacity of Turf Moor to 28,000 spectators.Work on the stadium was expected to start in late 2007 and finish in time for the 2010 season. Planning permission for the first stage of developments was granted in April 2008 and work on the new players' block was planned to commence in the summer of 2008. It was decided to not start building until permission had been received for all phases of the development including the rebuilding of the Cricket Field Stand. In October 2008, the project was put on hold by the club as a result of the global economic crisis restricting available funds. Further developments were also delayed due to the club's relegation from the Premier League.In September 2011, Burnley Football Club opened the UK's first ever football university at Turf Moor known as the University College of Football Business. Since then, other campus locations were opened at Wembley Stadium, London, and the Etihad Stadium, Manchester.
