
== Details ==


=== Stadium ===
The stadium is fully enclosed with every seat offering an uninterrupted view of the pitch. The four main stands are commonly known as the North, East, West and South stands. The corners are referred to as the North-East, North-West, South-East and South-West corners. Concourses run around the entirety of the ground with kiosks serving food and drink.
The North stand backs on to the River Tees and at the back of the Stand is some of the vocal support is housed, and thus is also known as the New Holgate End in reference the Holgate End at Ayresome Park, where the similar vocal supporters were located.
The West stand runs along the length of the pitch and is the stadium's largest stand. The stand contains a number of executive boxes along its length as well as restaurants etc. The stand houses the changing rooms, and the players tunnel emerges from the middle of the stand. White seating in the top tier spells out the club's nickname "BORO".
The East stand greets the players as they walk out the tunnel. The main television gantry was reallocated to the top of the stand from the west stand in 2016. White seating in the top tier of the stand spells out "MFC". The roof houses five flagpoles with various flags flying, usually representing the league and cup competitions the club are participating in, as well as a flag of the team crest. A new press box was installed at the back of this stand in preparation for the club's re-entry into the Premier League. The East stand houses a Family Zone (North east end) and also visiting supporters (South East Corner). Prior the 2016/17 season, two permanent television studios were installed at the back of the South East Corner, either side of the existing giant TV screen. One effect of this was a reduction in overall capacity.
The South stand has previously housed visiting supporters (now relocated to the East stand),  but since the 2013/14 season is currently (2017/18 season) occupied by home supporters. It includes most of the vocal support  is held, including Boro's own "Ultras" Group, the "Red Faction".


=== Records ===
Record Attendance (All teams):  35,000 England v Slovakia, 11 June 2003, (Euro 2004 qualifier)
Record Attendance (Middlesbrough):  34,836 v Norwich City, 28 December 2004 (FA Premier League)


=== Average league attendances =