
== Structure and facilities ==

The all-seater stadium consists of a single-tier, asymmetrical bowl that can seat approximately 20,000, with a second tier on the Cranswick plc West Stand that can seat approximately 5,000. Current capacity is 25,586. Plans provide for future expansion to a capacity of approximately 30,000 by the addition of a second tier on the Ideal Standard Community East Stand. Each stand has a name for corporate sponsorship purposes. On 4 July 2011, Hull City revealed that the stadium's west stand would be sponsored by the local Cranswick plc under a two-year agreement, which was extended on 26 July 2013.
On 10 July 2013 it was announced the east stand would be sponsored by Ideal Standard and become known as the Ideal Standard Community East Stand.Corporate hospitality is provided by 28 executive boxes located between the two tiers of the Cranswick plc West Stand,  while security of the stadium is handled using 57 closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras that cover the stadium. Over the summer of 2007, SMC installed an LED screen in the Smith & Nephew North Stand to replace the old electronic scoreboard. The screen has an area of approximately 40 m² (430 ft.²) and displays such content as live home game feeds, match highlights, interviews, and action replays.

The stadium's seats are mostly black, with a band of white and amber seats around the circumference. White and amber seats form the word Hull in the north and south stands. In the Ideal Standard Community East Stand, the seats form an image of a coronet, a symbol of the city that also appears in the club crest for Hull F.C. and in the coat of arms of the city council. Black, white, and amber were chosen to remain neutral toward the colours of its two tenants: black and white for Hull F.C.and  black and amber for Hull City A.F.C.. The blue and gold of owner Hull City Council appear in the stadium's four external columns.The size of the playing surface is 114 x 74 metres (125 x 81 yd) and made of rye grass with a 3% additive of artificial grass. This provides ample room for a FIFA-regulation association football pitch of 105 x 68 metres (115 x 74 yd) and a standard rugby league football pitch of 100 x 68 metres (109 x 74 yd). The playing surface has an automated watering system and below-surface heating.Set within Hull's West Park, the stadium is the first in England to be built in a parkland setting. The stadium complex also includes the 1,500 seat Bonus Arena, a skate park, two multi-use all-weather pitches, a community learning zone complete with classrooms, a health & fitness suite, a cyber cafe, and a library.The KCOM Stadium has received several honours. It was named the chief new development in Yorkshire at the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors Pro-Yorkshire Awards. It was also on the shortlist for the Prime Minister's Award for Better Public Building and received a high commendation in the British Construction Industry Awards in the Best Value category. In a 2005 poll that was carried out by Drivers Jonas and decided by football fans from across the country, the KC Stadium was rated highest in comfort, services and view among all grounds in the Football League and was also rated the most-improved venue.On 13 August 2013 a Goal Decision System by Hawk-Eye was installed in the ground ahead of the 2013–14 Premier League season which requires the use of goal-line technology to indicate if a goal is scored.
