
== Future ==
In August 2001, when Leeds were still a leading Premier League side, chairman Peter Ridsdale unveiled plans for the club to relocate to a 50,000-seat stadium in Skelton. The following month, the club's 33,250 season ticket holders were asked to vote on the proposed relocation. 87.6% of them voted in favour of relocation, but the plans were abandoned within two years following the onset of the club's financial crisis and decline in fortunes on the field.The city of Leeds, on behalf of the Leeds City Region, submitted an application to be a Host City for the 2018 World Cup at Wembley on 26 November 2009. The club was represented by Peter Lorimer. This bid was successful on 16 December 2009.
Due to the specific stadium requirements imposed by FIFA, it is likely that the redevelopment of the Kop (North Stand) will become two-tiered to approximately the same height as the current East Stand whilst the West Stand will be completely rebuilt with an envisaged final capacity of 51,240.The redevelopment of the East Stand for which Leeds already have planning permission will play a significant part in providing the facilities required by FIFA to stage matches in the World Cup.
Despite the English Football Association's unsuccessful bid to host the 2018 World Cup, the first phase of the East Stand redevelopment plan began in May 2011. This includes the adding of an executive tier sandwiched between the lower and upper tier of the East Stand which holds boxes such as the Gary Speed Suite, named after their legendary former player who died in November 2011. The East Stand façade was also given a makeover.
Plans for the redevelopment of the ground had also included a hotel and casino. The casino plans were dealt a blow when Leeds City Council granted a provisional statement for a large casino licence to a rival scheme in the city centre Victoria Gate development and the hotel plans also seem unlikely to happen due to change in club ownership to GFH Capital and then to Massimo Cellino who did not go ahead with the plans.
