
== Structure and facilities ==

The stadium is divided into five all-seater stands, the JCT600 Stand, the Kop, the Midland Road Stand, the North West Corner and the TL Dallas Stand. All five stands are covered except for a small part of the main stand, and all but the Midland Road Stand being two-tiered. Most of the stands are cantilever structures, and because of the ground's location on the hillside, the Midland Road Stand overhangs the road.Many of the stands have more traditional names, but have since been renamed because of sponsorship deals. The JCT600 Stand is the ground's main stand, and is often called the latter by fans, but is also known as the Sunwin stand owing to the former sponsor. The Kop, was the former standing area, and its name was derived, like at many stadia across the country, from the Battle of Spion Kop. The East Stand, sponsored by Northern Commercials, is also named the Midland Road stand, because of the road on that side of the ground. The TL Dallas Stand is also known as the Bradford end, because it is nearest to the city centre.The total capacity of Valley Parade is 25,136. The largest stand is the JCT600 Stand, which holds 9,004 supporters, followed by the Kop, which has a capacity of 7,492. The Midland Road Stand holds 4,500, and the North West Corner 2,300. The TL Dallas Stand is the smallest of the five stands with a capacity of 1,840. The stadium includes 134 seats for media representatives.The Sunwin Stand has further room for expansion, and is unusual because it only runs three-quarters of the length of the pitch. The rest of this side is taken up by a brick building, situated in the south west corner of the stadium, which houses the club changing rooms and the security offices. The Sunwin Stand also includes the ground's 17 executive boxes and conference facilities, which have capacity for up to 700 people. A second function room, called the Bantams Bar, in the Kop, has room for another 300 people. There is also more office space, a club store, ticket office and museum in the car park behind the Kop. From early 2010, the area near the store will also include a dental surgery, which will be run by NHS Bradford and Airedale in partnership with the football club.Visiting team fans sat in the TL Dallas Stand from 1995 to 2008, but have also been given other parts of the ground for larger matches. In March 2008, the club announced that the TL Dallas Stand would be made available for home fans for the 2008–09 season. The decision came after an overwhelmingly positive text message poll from the club's supporters to use the Bradford End of the ground. Visiting team fans have been accommodated in the end blocks of the East Stand since the start of the 2008–09 season. Since the 2013–14 Season away fans have moved back to the TL Dallas stand.
