
== Layout ==


=== Revie Stand ===

Capacity: 7,000 (including North-East and North-West corners)
The Revie Stand is at the north end of the ground. It was previously known as the Gelderd End or Kop and was originally a standing terrace, It was renamed in 1994 in honour of the club's most successful manager and former player, Don Revie. The Revie Stand was officially opened in October by the club's president, George Lascelles, 7th Earl of Harewood and Mrs E. Revie, the widow of Don Revie. The design has 7,000 seats as stipulated by the Taylor Report, making Elland Road an all-seater stadium. There is a "ground control box" in the north-west corner which is the most advanced in Europe. Videos and photographs taken of everyone entering the ground are monitored and security operations are synchronised. Images and video footage are obtained by the security cameras located around the ground.


=== East Stand ===

Capacity: 14,900
The East Stand is the most recently constructed stand in the stadium. The two-tiered structure was built in the 1992–93 season to replace the Lowfields stand and was opened in the 1993–94 season at a cost of £5.5 million. On completion, it was the largest cantilever stand in the world, holding 10,000 spectators in the lower tier and a further 7,000 in the upper tier. The family area was moved from the South Stand and originally spanned the full lower tier; however, this was altered by Ken Bates and there are now two sections, one at either end of the lower tier for club members and season ticket holders attending matches with children. Sandwiched in between are 25 executive boxes and a large concourse with merchandise outlets, food shops, betting booths and a restaurant. Due to the redevelopment, the capacity of the East Stand was reduced and the words Leeds United AFC were taken off the seats.


=== South Stand ===

Capacity: 5,000 (including South-East and South-West corners)
The South Stand was built in 1974 at a cost of £500,000 to replace the Scratching Shed, which had been there since the 1920s. It comprises two small tiers intersected with a row of 32 executive boxes and an executive restaurant. There are a few seats in the South-West Corner, and a large video screen for the 2009–10 season. The South-East Corner seats 1,710 fans and was used to house the away fans until they were moved to the West Stand. In summer 2006, the stand was redeveloped and closed for the first few games of the 2006–07 season. The refurbishment included boxing in the concrete columns and alcoves to give the stand a more modern exterior; an overhaul of the kitchen concourse area; a mezzanine-level office area; a total modernisation of the corporate facilities above and a restaurant called Billy's Bar, named after former captain Billy Bremner. There is a statue in honour of Bremner at the south-east corner of the stadium erected in 1998, after his death on 7 December 1997. The club's superstore is nearby.


=== John Charles Stand ===

Capacity: 11,000
The John Charles Stand is on the west side of the pitch and was known as the West Stand until the fans demanded a tribute to former player John Charles, following his death on 21 February 2004. It is currently the oldest two-tiered stand at Elland Road, having been built in 1957 after the previous stand burnt down, ironically forcing Charles' sale as the club needed the funds to pay for a new stand. The corporate seats are located here and there is a commentary gantry and walkway for TV personnel. The radio and press have facilities in this stand. The West Stand houses the tunnel and the directors' box, where home and away team directors view the match, along with the club doctor. There are many suites incorporated within the stand and a banqueting suite and conference centre are attached to the rear, having been opened in April 1992. As of September 2011 parts of the West Stand became the new home for away fans following a £300,000 refurbishment. Future plans would see the John Charles Stand redeveloped to hold a two-floored, three-tiered 3500 square metre site. This redevelopment of the West Stand would see a new upper tier introduced along with executive boxes as part of the ambitions of turning Elland Road into a stadium further capable of hosting world class matches and events; however it is now unlikely that any redevelopment of the west stand will take place due to change of club ownership who did not go ahead with the plans.


=== The pitch ===
The pitch measures approximately 115 yards (105 m) long by 74 yards (68 m) wide, with run-off space on each side. There is an under-soil heating system installed beneath the surface, consisting of 59 miles (95 km) of piping. This, together with a good drainage system, means that only heavy fog, a blizzard, or flooding would force the club to cancel a match. There are wells sunk approximately 70 feet (21 m) beneath the West Stand and the North Stand and a pumping system is situated under the South Stand, meaning that the club can draw on its own supply of water, should the need arise. However, the first time the club used it, the pitch turned black as the water was too cold.
