
== History ==


=== Planning, construction and opening ===
Between forming in 1889 and prior to 1904, Brentford played at five grounds around Ealing – Clifden Road, Benns Field, Shotters Field, Cross Road and Boston Park Cricket Ground. In 1903, Fulham chairman Henry Norris (a prominent estate agent), Brentford manager Dick Molyneux and club president Edwin Underwood negotiated a 21-year lease at a peppercorn rent on an orchard along the Ealing Road (owned by local brewers Fuller, Smith and Turner), with the option to buy the freehold at a later date for £5,000. After a gypsy camp was removed from the site, work began on building the ground in January 1904, under the guidance of architects Parr & Kates. The orchard was cut down by local volunteers, who were allowed to keep the wood.The ground was initially built with a 20,000 capacity in mind, with a provision for an increase to 30,000–40,000. An 800-capacity stand from Boston Park was rebuilt alongside the Braemar Road side of the ground, with an extension alongside taking the stand's capacity to 1,500. Beneath and behind the stand were three dressing rooms (one for each team and one for officials), a number of offices and a recreation room. The ground was named 'Griffin Park' after a nearby pub, The Griffin, which was owned by the Griffin Brewery and was used as dressing rooms and for accommodation. After a number of trial games, Griffin Park was opened on 1 September 1904. Season tickets for the 1904–05 season (priced between 10 shillings and one guinea) sold out.


=== The first matches ===

The first competitive match to be played at Griffin Park was a Western League fixture versus Plymouth Argyle on 1 September 1904. The Braemar Road grandstand had been completed by the time of the fixture, but as the dressing rooms were not ready, the players were forced to change at the public baths in Clifden Road. The borough surveyor also declared the grandstand unsafe and banned its use until improvements had been made. Argyle scored the first competitive goal at the ground through Fred Buck, but four minutes from the final whistle, Tommy Shanks converted a James Swarbrick cross to secure a 1–1 draw. The attendance was estimated at between 4,000 and 5,000.The first truly first team fixture to be played at the ground was a Southern League First Division match on 3 September 1904, which yielded a 0–0 draw between Brentford and West Ham United. The Bees would have to wait until 22 October 1904 for their first victory at the ground, a 2–0 win over Millwall. The first Football League match to be played at the ground was on the opening day of the 1920–21 season, a 3–0 Third Division defeat to Exeter City.


=== Development ===

A new grandstand was constructed on the Braemar Road side of the ground using £5,000 of the money generated from Brentford's run to the fifth round of the FA Cup during the 1926–27 season, replacing the 'cow shed'. Unlike the old grandstand, the new stand ran the length of the pitch. After the season, it was announced that Griffin Park would be completely redeveloped over the following decade. Concrete terracing was installed at the Ealing Road end of the ground in 1930. A new stand was constructed at the Brook Road end of the ground in the 1933 off-season and the New Road terrace was extended the following year to allow a further 5,000 supporters to be accommodated. A further extension to the terracing and a roof was added prior to Brentford's debut First Division season in 1935–36, taking the New Road stand's capacity to 20,000.Little development occurred at Griffin Park between the mid-1930s, and the mid-1980s. The frontage of the Braemar Road stand was rebuilt in 1963, adding club offices and a club room. Flats were built in a spare, matchday parking area behind the Ealing Road terrace in 1985 and the following year the Brook Road 'kop' was torn down and replaced by a two-tiered stand, now colloquially known as the 'Wendy House'. On the New Road side of the ground, the 1930s extension to the terrace was removed, with a new sheet metal wall added to the back of the stand.The pitch was moved a few metres to the west in 2006, in order to accommodate box goal nets and the following year, a roof was finally added to the Ealing Road terrace. Numerous improvements were made after Brentford's promotion to the Championship in 2014, including resurfacing of access areas, extra CCTV, new signage, new heated seats in the dugouts and AstroTurf installed in the pitch-side run-off areas. With the club placed in the Championship playoff places in January 2015, additional work was carried out on the New Road stand ahead of a deadline for submission of a report to the Premier League, which outlined development plans ahead of a potential promotion. LED advertising boards were installed at the ground for the first time during the 2017–18 season and goal-line technology was installed at the ground during the 2017 off-season.


=== Crowd disturbance ===
The only occasion on which Griffin Park has been closed due to crowd trouble was following a Third Division South match versus Brighton & Hove Albion on 12 September 1925. Ill-feeling on the pitch sparked trouble on the terraces and following the referee's report, the FA closed the ground for 14 days. The following home match against Crystal Palace was moved to Selhurst Park, where Brentford suffered a 2–0 defeat and dropped to bottom place in the Football League.


=== Wartime bombing ===
Griffin Park was hit by two high-explosive bombs in 1940 and 1941, during the Second World War. Six matches were abandoned or postponed during the Blitz.


=== The "Great Fire of Brentford" ===

At 11:30 PM on 1 February 1983, a fire broke out in the Braemar Road Stand, possibly due to an electrical fault in the boiler room under the stand. The fire quickly spread through the timber used in the construction of the stand. Groundsman Alec Banks, who lived under the stand, was rescued by then-Brentford player Stan Bowles and his wife Jane. 60 people were evacuated from homes nearby and an estimated £150,000 worth of damage was caused, including 800 seats, the away dressing room, the gymnasium, the kit store and the laundry. It was after the reconstruction that the players' tunnel was moved to the western corner of the Braemar Road Stand, with the players having previously emerged from a tunnel at the half way line.


=== "Fortress Griffin Park" ===
Brentford set an English football record when the club won all 21 home games during the 1929–30 Third Division South season. Despite the record (which still stands), the Bees finished as runners-up to Plymouth Argyle and failed to win promotion to Second Division. Brentford finished the 2014 calendar year with the best home record in the Football League, winning 17 of 23 games (two more than the next-best tally) and accruing a 78% winning record.


=== Ticketing ===
The club installed an electronic ticketing system on all turnstiles at Griffin Park in the summer of 2014. Previously, supporters were able to pay on the turnstiles on match days for non-all-ticket matches.
