
== History ==
The stadium has been the home of Kingstonian since 1989, when they built the entire complex on the site following the sale of their traditional Richmond Road ground. Kingstonian opened the ground with a friendly against Queens Park Rangers. Following relegation from the Conference, Kingstonian went into financial administration and both the club and ground were purchased by Rajesh Khosla and his son Anup. Much of Kingstonian's support were alienated as there was a perception that the Khoslas were business men first rather than football oriented.
AFC Wimbledon have played at the stadium since they were founded in protest in 2002, after Wimbledon F.C. were given permission to move 56 miles north-west to the town of Milton Keynes. They were in the Combined Counties League at this time, but in 2016 reached Football League One.

After one season as tenants of the Khoslas, AFC Wimbledon undertook to buy the leasehold to the ground. The club's owners, the Dons Trust, launched a share issue to finance the purchase, which was closed the following summer. The club subsequently arranged for a commercial loan to clear the remaining debt to the Khoslas. Upon taking over the ground, its name was changed to the Fans' Stadium which remains the nickname of the ground today.
AFC Wimbledon kept Kingstonian on as tenants and charged them a peppercorn rent, lower than that which had been charged to themselves by the Khoslas, with both gate receipts and bar takings at Kingstonian games being retained solely by Kingstonian (which continued to be Khosla-owned until 2005). An annual friendly between the two clubs was also intended to defray the cost of the rent.
In November 2015 AFC Wimbledon supporters backed a proposal to sell the ground to Chelsea F.C., who were interested to use the ground for its youth teams and women's team.In January 2017 it was announced that Kingstonian would move to Leatherhead F.C.'s ground for the following season. On 22 February 2017, Kingstonian officially announced that they will be sharing Leatherhead F.C.'s ground at Fetcham Grove for the 2017–18 season. On 16 January 2018, Kingstonian announced they would be on the move once more this time to King George's Field in Tolworth to share with Corinthian-Casuals F.C. starting in the 2018-19 season.
The sale was hugely detrimental to Kingstonian, it has made the local club's future very uncertain, with them unable to play in a ground that is now too big and expensive for a non-league side and one which they no longer have any decision over, having now to relocate.In May 2017 it was confirmed that the ground would become the new home of Chelsea Women, beginning with the 2017-18 FA WSL season.
