
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===

The Koolie is as diverse as the country it originates from, Australia. In the north of Queensland and New South Wales they are tall, medium boned and agile, bred for mustering Simmental cattle and Brahma over many miles.
In The Hunter Valley region and Snowy Mountains of New South Wales, they're thicker set and shorter to flush low lying cattle from the dense bush and gullies. In Victoria, one finds the smallest variety of the Koolie. Koolies are bred to meet the needs of the stockman, grazier and farmer, all agile, all with the same ability to adapt to any situation, all with a strong willingness drive. The Koolie vary from 40 to 60 centimetres (16 to 24 in) in size and are a contrast of coat, colour and body type, although they are merled coat pattern. The solid red or black Koolie are often mistaken for Kelpies, and some bi coloured Koolie have been taken for Border Collies by the general public, rarely if ever by breeders. As all of these breeds share Collie ancestry, they resemble each other.


=== Coat ===

The Koolie coat ranges from short/smooth (like that of the original blue merle Collies from Scotland), short (like a working Kelpie), medium and, not common, long (like the show Border Collie). Koolies are typically slightly longer than tall. The majority of owners prefer the short/smooth coats as they do not pick up grass seed, and are very easy to maintain, with the occasional swim to keep the coat glossy and free of parasites.


=== Colouring ===
Koolie colours can be solid (all one colour black or red/chocolate (this includes Koolie who are cryptic merle: carry the merle gene but do not display it obviously)) "bi" (black & white or red & white) "tri" (solid red or black, with white markings, normally with brown points), or "tri merle" (same description but merle) "merle" (grey, black, red/chocolate or white undercoat with large splashes of darker colourings of red/chocolate for red merles or black/grey for blue merles). Black Koolies will commonly have a black nose with black eyes, or tones of black including blue. Red or chocolate Koolies will commonly have a red or chocolate nose with brown eyes, or tones of brown, including yellow, and there can be combinations of both black or brown with the added blue eye/s.
There are also dilute colours of slate or gun metal grey for black Koolies and fawn for Red Koolies.
Also there is a yellow or cream colour created by the E,loci which is a masking gene and covers a red/chocolate Koolie to make it appear yellow/cream, this gene will also cover any merle, so it is advised that great care be taken and DNA testing done to discover if the E,loci is present before breeding.
The same advice is given with relations to the dilute gene.


=== Temperament ===

Graziers, stockmen and dairy farmers across Australia since days long past have typically selected breeds which display the abilities required to meet their working needs. The temperament found in a Koolie is a culmination of these much sought-after abilities. The optimal worker possesses a combination of working skills and bonding temperament.
There are times when an uninitiated dog owner or a new enthusiast mistakes the Koolie as a shy, reserved or even a timid animal. The Koolie's temperament needs to be understood in proper context when one seeks an optimal match of skills and demeanour. Koolies are intelligent animals, and the most experienced handlers know well that they need guidance in training. A steady and supportive approach will be productive, proving the Koolie's adaptability in diverse situations when given time.
Owners will be rewarded through the Koolie's diligence in varied roles such as in work situations, sporting activities, loyal service or the time honoured role of companionship. Known to be patient, temperate, dedicated, with a strong sense of willingness and devotion; the Koolie is not naturally aggressive but can demonstrate dominance. They show an untiring enthusiasm for work and an admirable hardiness when the job or circumstance requires.
