
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===
The Lagotto Romagnolo is a curly coated dog with an appearance of being robust and hardy. All colors are allowed except black, the coat is dense and wooly in texture. The body is square and classified as medium in size. 

Males
Height: 43–48 cm (17–19 in)
Weight: 13–16 kg  (29-35 lb)
Females
Height: 41–46 cm (16–18 in).
Weight: 11–14 kg (24-32 lb).


=== Temperament ===

The Lagotto is a Sporting breed. They generally have sharp senses, although their eyesight is more sensitive to motion than to detail. The breed is very loyal and loving, making them the perfect family companion. Some are easy to train, and many get along with other animals quite easily if they are socialized as puppies. Lagotti vary in their need for exercise, but should always be given stimulation to keep their minds occupied. It is worth noting that the first pair (Reno and Rosetta) bought to pioneer the Lagotto in the UK in 1996, came from the Mandriole kennels on the edge of the Comacchio where the dogs were still worked from the traditional flat-bottomed punts as duck retrievers. These Lagotti, through subsequent exports from the UK which provided the foundation stock for Canada, USA and Australia, can be found behind many Lagotti worldwide. Visitors to the Lagotto Romagnolo Club of Great Britain breed, which stand at the world-famous Crufts Dog Show in the UK, will have seen photographs of British Lagotti (including Rosetta) retrieving hare, rabbit and various types of wildfowl. It is also worth noting that the photograph on the back of the first official video produced in Italy circa 1996, showed a group of Lagotti working - not truffling, but duck-shooting from a punt. In that punt were the parents and grandparents of Rosetta and Reno. The instinct to hunt, swim and retrieve is inborn and does not have to be encouraged. Lagotti have to be trained from an early age to look for truffles.
In modern times, the Lagotto has been bred primarily as a truffle-searching dog, and not as a retriever or hunting dog. Its highly developed noses makes it a prime search dog.
Some Lagotti are excellent swimmers, while some will only paddle. Some will retrieve from lakes, streams and other bodies of water without hesitation. They are lovable family pets and tend to like attention. Lagotti love to dig. Many owners give them a sandbox, or have a designated place to allow them satisfy their digging urges. They also love to play seeking games and have very active and clever minds.
