
== Appearance ==
The Plummer terrier is a striking dog to look at, its fiery red coat should conform to two distinct patterns collared (a white band around the neck) and caped (only showing white on the throat). They should be heavily coloured and preferably be no more than 14” at the shoulder. Terriers that do not possess collared or caped markings are labelled shattered, they are perfectly fine as workers, companions but are not classed as good examples of the breed.  The same can be said for tricolours, dogs which carry black in their colouring.The ears fold over like most terriers, and the nose and eye are typically black, and the jaw has a good scissors bite.


=== Breed standard ===
Plummer defined a breed standard in 2000.

General Character: a Plummer Terrier should be strong, hardy, active and adaptable, with terrier characteristics and as much substance as possible. They should be equally at home in the house as in the kennel, be highly intelligent, courageous and tenacious. Affectionate, loyal and trustworthy with family and friends.  Yet should present a bright, alert appearance without displaying any excessive aggression or nervousness.
Head: medium-sized, full of quality with strong bones and powerful cheek and jaw muscles. Slight bull terrier characteristics are encouraged as is a well defined stop.
Ears: dropped, rounded, and neatly pinned to head. Prick or rose ears are not encouraged.
Eyes: dark, prominent and oval, set widely apart.
Muzzle: strong, lips close with no excessive looseness. Teeth strong and even with full scissor bite.
Neck: strong, elegant, especially in the case of bitches, and well carried.
Shoulders and forelegs: strong, well laid back and developed without excessive muscle tone. Forelegs should be set square and straight and not tied in. Feet should be well shaped and dense. No resemblance of bend in front.
Back, hindquarters and hind legs: back and loins, muscular, strong and well coupled, with well defined muscle development. Hindquarters should be lengthy and strong, with a well set on tail. Hind legs - second thigh should be strong and muscular. Hocks clean and flat, turning neither inwards nor outwards. The hind leg must not be too bent. Feet: well shaped and dense.
Body: square in appearance when viewed from side i.e. distance of shoulder to ground. Depth through the heart should be easily spanned by two hands placed just behind the shoulders.
Tail: carried high. Preferably docked and balanced to the size of the dog. Curled tails not encouraged.
Coat: short, close and without guard hairs, yet with the ability to withstand weather. Loose / broken coats not acceptable.
Colour and markings: a bright fiery red with white. Full cape markings from head to tail, or a broad collar of white between head and shoulders are encouraged. Underside of the belly and chest, front and rear legs should be white although flecking is acceptable. Head either solid colour, or with stripe or badger marked. Tricolour Plummer terriers are still produced in small numbers today and whilst registerable with club registrars they are generally not encouraged.
Height: maximum height to the shoulder, dog or bitch 14 inches.
Movement: should be light, energetic, free, true and forcible and cover the ground. Hocks should be flexed under the body with straight powerful leverage.
Faults: undershot or overshot mouths. Unsoundness, coarseness or displaying a hereditary fault.
