
== Registration and representation ==
The Portuguese Podengo in the UK is represented by The Portuguese Podengo Club of Great Britain and The Northern Portuguese Podengo Association, and the Podengo Pequeno was recognized by the Kennel Club in 2003. The Breed Standard was approved on January 1, 2006. The Podengo Pequeno was transferred from the Import Register into the Breed Register on January 1, 2008 at the Kennel Club. The Podengo Pequeno now has its own breed classes at Championship Shows and Open Shows (the other sizes are in the process of being included). The Podengo Pequeno was shown at Crufts for the first time in 2009. There are approximately 500 Podengos (primarily Pequeno) now resident in the UK.
All three sizes and varieties of the Portuguese Podengo have been registered at the United Kennel Club since 2004 and are in the Sighthound & Pariah Group. The Podengo Pequeno became AKC recognized in January 2013 and is now registered there. Incorporated in 2009, Portuguese Podengo Pequenos of America is the AKC club for the breed in the US and is mostly in a few western states and the Midwest. The Portuguese Podengo Pequeno Club of America (PPPCA), founded in 2001, is the first and largest club of Podengo Pequeno owners in the USA and is in 40 states. They are the only club dedicated to BOTH the wire coat and the smooth coat varieties of the breed. The PPPCA was incorporated in January 2003 in Newport, Rhode Island and 85% of its members own Portuguese Podengo Pequenos. Other organizations that recognize the Podengo (all sizes) in the US are the United Kennel Club, American Rare Breed Association, North American Kennel Club and The American Sighthound Field Association.  The Portuguese Podengo Medio and Grande are represented in the United States by The American Portuguese Podengo Medio/Grande Club (APPMGC or 'MGC').The United Kingdom registers the most Podengos, followed by Finland, the United States and Portugal.
In Europe, the Podengo is classified by the Fédération Cynologique Internationale (FCI) as Group 5: Spitz and primitive type, Section 7: Primitive type hunting dogs. The FCI breed standard, which originates in Portugal, governs all types and varieties of the Portuguese Podengo. In both the United States and the UK the Portuguese Podengo is classified in the Hound Group.
