
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===

Miniature Bull Terriers have short, fine, and glossy coats that are very close to the skin, like Bull Terriers. They are accepted in the ring to be white, white with another colour, or fully coloured. However, like the Standards, any blue or liver coloured coats are undesirable. These dogs require minimal grooming.
In the early 1900s, the difference between the breeds was determined by the dog's weight. However, this led to Miniature Bull Terriers becoming so small and fine that they looked more like a Chihuahua than a Bull Terrier. So, in the 1970s, the weight limit was replaced with a height limit of under fourteen inches. They are usually no smaller than ten inches.  According to the AKC, miniature bull terriers' weight must be proportionate to its height. However, they tend to range anywhere from 20–35 lbs.
The Miniature Bull Terriers have a very bold build. They have very muscular shoulders and a full body. Like the Bull Terrier, they have a head described as "egg-shaped". It is flat on top with a Roman nose. The eyes are triangular and closely set. The ears are carried erect and are not cropped or otherwise altered. The tail is carried horizontally rather than vertically.


=== Temperament ===
Like Bull Terriers, Mini Bulls are loving and, like many terrier breeds, they can be stubborn at times; but despite this they make great dogs for people with limited space.
Miniature Bull Terriers are known to be stubborn and courageous. Despite their dimuitive stature, they will readily challenge larger dogs. However, as with any dog, owners can reduce the likelihood of confrontations by providing appropriate training. They are very energetic and playful and love people, but care must be taken as they are variable around other dogs.
Miniature Bull Terriers require little grooming. A quick brushing once a day or a few times a week is sufficient. Sunscreen must be used on any sparse white sections of fur around the face, ears, hindquarters or stomach when outdoors (especially in the summer between the hours of 10am and 2pm) to avoid sunburn and cancer.


=== Training ===
Miniatures are independent and stubborn and do require a lot of training, particularly early on. They must be heavily socialized at a young age and trained to obey early in their lives. They also are very energetic and seem to be able to play endlessly as puppies. However, as they grow older, they become less energetic. They must be carefully exercised and dieted to avoid obesity.
