
== DNA evidence ==

In 2013, a study looked at the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplotypes associated with samples of the Carolina dog.
The study showed that 58% of the dogs carried universal haplotypes that could be found around the world (haplotypes A16, A18, A19, and B1), 5% carried haplotypes associated with Korea and Japan (A39), and 37% carried a unique haplotype that was not recorded before (A184) and that relates to the a5 mtDNA sub-haplogroup that originated in East Asia. As the Australian dingo and the New Guinea singing dog belong to haplotype A29 that relates to the a2 sub-haplogroup, there is no genetic relationship in the mtDNA. Also in 2013, another study of several dog breeds in the Americas — among them the Carolina dog, the  Peruvian Hairless Dog and the Chihuahua indicated an ancient migration from Asia.In 2015, a study was conducted using mitochondrial (female lineage marker), Y-chromosome (male lineage marker), and autosomal genetic markers in 4,676 purebred dogs from 161 breeds and 549 village dogs from 38 countries. The study tested for the degree of admixture with European breed dogs. The study found no yDNA haplotypes that were indigenous to North American dogs outside of the Arctic. However, the mtDNA of Carolina dogs contained between 10% and 35% pre-Columbian ancestry (mtDNA haplotype A184) that clustered with East Asian dogs.Brisbin proposed that the some of the Carolina dog's ancestors arrived with the first, prehistoric Americans. 
In 2018, a study compared sequences of fossil North American dogs with fossil Siberian dogs and modern dogs. The study indicates that dogs entered North America from Siberia 4,500 years after humans did, were isolated for 9,000 years, and after contact with Europeans these no longer exist because they were replaced with Eurasian dogs. The pre-contact dogs exhibit a unique genetic signature that is also now gone, with their nearest genetic relatives being the arctic breed dogs. Three Carolina dogs in the study exhibited up to 33% pre-contact/arctic lineage, however the study could not rule out this being the result of admixture with modern Arctic breed dogs.
