
== Appearance ==
According to the American Kennel Club (AKC) standard, male Neapolitan Mastiffs should measure 26–31 inches (66–79 cm) at the withers, weigh 130–155 pounds (60-70 kg), while females should measure 24–29 inches (61–74 cm) and weigh 110–130 pounds (50–60 kg). Body length should be 10–15% greater than height.
The Neapolitan Mastiff is large and powerful. Their bodies are covered in loose skin with a coat that can either be black, blue, mahogany or tawny.


=== Temperament ===

The Neapolitan Mastiff is fearless and extremely protective of its home and family. They prefer to be with their family. The Neapolitan Mastiff rarely barks unless under provocation, renowned for sneaking up on intruders as opposed to first alerting them of its presence.
Neapolitan Mastiffs, as a breed, are extremely intelligent dogs with a tendency to be independent thinkers. They learn quickly, which is both good and bad, since this guardian breed needs extensive proper socialization to learn to accept strangers, especially within the home; without proper early socialization and training, these dogs are likely to become aggressive towards strangers and unfamiliar dogs.
Neapolitans must be well socialized with people (especially children), as they are large, powerful dogs and do not always know their own strength. Additionally, young children have young friends, and even with extensive socialization and training, Neapolitans will be wary of strangers and protective of their family, which can be disastrous for small children. Most of the time, they will protect their owners with their lives.
Additional protection training is unnecessary because they are natural guard dogs and always have been. As with every breed, obedience training is very important. The Neapolitan is very tolerant of pain due to the breed's early fighting background and the fact the skin is loose on the body, so it is important to routinely check for health problems, as a Neapolitan may not behave differently when injured or ill. They also are renowned for drooling especially after drinking or if they get excited.
The Neapolitan Mastiff has a low activity level, even as a puppy. Visits to dog parks should be minimal, considering they can be aggressive to other dogs they are not familiar with. The ideal environment for this breed is in its home with a large yard and a fence five or six feet high.
