
== History ==
The Great Pyrenees is a very old breed that has been used for hundreds of years by shepherds, including those of the Basque people, who inhabit parts of the region in and around the Pyrenees Mountains of southern France and northern Spain (specifically Aragon and Navarre).Varro, a Roman author who lived in the first century BC, wrote in his treatise of rural economy "De re rustica" in 37 BC.:
"The dog is essential for those who raise animals for wool. It is the guardian of livestock in general but is the natural defender of the sheep and goats. The wolf lurks constantly and we oppose it with the dogs"... "As for its appearance, choose those who are well-trained, large size, with black or red eyes, the nose of the same color, red lips pulling to black, not too collected, nor too pendants"... "It is equally essential that the dogs have strong head, long, floppy ears, wide and short neck, thighs and rights more inwardly turned than out, wide legs, fingers apart, hard nails and bent, spine nor projection nor convex, bushy tail, sonorous voice, good match muzzle and preferably with white hair so that it can be easily distinguished from wild animals at night."

One of the first descriptions of the breed dates from 1407, Fray Miguel Agustín, "prior" of the Temple who lived between 1560 and 1630, published in 1617 in Catalan (the first edition appeared in Spanish in 1622), a book which he called Libro de los secretos de la agricultura, casa de campo y pastoril. It gives the reasons why shepherds prefer white puppies, excluding those born with spots of dark color. Relates the friar: "The wool cattle dogs should not must be so big or so heavy as those of the guard of the house, but strong and sturdy, lightweight and ready to combat and fight and for run, because they have to make saves and guard against wolves and hunt them down if those take a cattle... These should be white, so that the shepherd can easily see when these run after the wolf and know them in the evening and the morning."From 1675 the breed was a favorite of The Grand Dauphin and other members of the French aristocracy.In the mid-19th century, the breed was not homogenized. According to the article published on February 20, 1874 in the journal "Acclimatization" and written by the canine expert Kermadec, says:
"There in the Pyrenees various types of large dogs, called Mountain Dogs, and among other, two very different varieties:
-One, We might designate with the name "Dog of the Western Pyrenees," particularly widespread around Bagneres-de-Bigorre; have thick snout, hanging lips, rounded ears, a little curly coat black and white, seems to be largely the strain of large dogs designated with the name Terra-Nova Dogs, widespread throughout France.
-The Second type is the "Dog of the Eastern Pyrenees" is large, very slender shape, pointed snout, pointy ears and falls, soft, silky and abundant coat, a complete white snow color. In some cases there is a blackish band around the eyes, but often it is completely white... It was extended once in the Republic of Andorra and part of Spain, but in Andorra is completely extirpated. It might still exist in the mountains of Spain."


=== Spread ===
It is possible that Venezuelan Mucuchies breed descend from the Great Pyrenees, other Spanish breeds, and other few more breeds, that could be introduced in 16th century by Spanish conquistadors.The real spread of the Great Pyrenees out of its mountains developed in the 19th century with the birth of Romanticism. This breed, first appreciated for its beauty and poise, and then by its innate temperamental qualities, gained fame in the rest of Europe. Great Pyrenees were introduced in America by General Lafayette in 1824. In Australia they were introduced in 1843 to save herds on a farm in Hamilton.
By the early 19th century there was a thriving market for the dogs in mountain towns, from which they would be taken to other parts of France. The dog was developed to be agile in order to guard sheep on steep, mountainous slopes.The breed is said to be part of the mix that was used to create the Leonberger.
