
== Temperament ==

The Akbash personality tends to be calm and aware. As a breed, it is not shy, nor is it aggressive. When used as a protection dog, it is suspicious of strangers in its territory, and any unusual sounds or changes in the environment. The breed is not naturally hostile, and is instead, naturally discerning, bred to think independently. The Akbash can be powerful against predators, yet, when properly exposed, be gentle with newborn lambs and goat kids. The usual first means of protection by an Akbash is to warn potential threats by posturing, barking and/or growling. The Akbash will chase away a predator, or engage in physical combat if necessary.
Although the Akbash is frequently mistakenly referred to as being a herding dog, they do not chase and round up livestock. Akbash Dogs should never chase livestock although occasionally they may move their charges away from danger. The Akbash Dog is one of the more popular of about 30 breeds worldwide of Flock Guardians, Livestock Protection Dogs, or Livestock Guardian Dogs (LGDs).
In their role as livestock guardian dogs, Akbash Dogs frequently spend long hours lying with flocks or herds. The Akbash is a relatively low energy breed, although they are said to always be thinking and taking in what is happening around them (and that they "sleep with one eye open"). They regularly patrol the perimeters of their territories; listening, scenting and seeing beyond any fence lines. Like their sighthound ancestors, the vision of Akbash Dogs is excellent. They reserve much of their physical energy for possible encounters with predators.
When protecting their charges they have tremendous power, focus, endurance and perseverance. Their great speed, loose neck skin, flexible bodies and bounding athleticism give them the physical edge they need to excel as livestock protection dogs. Most predators will not openly confront a working Akbash Dog. To avoid injuries to livestock protection dogs, and to better protect flocks and herds, more than one dog should be used in many working situations. Predators are less likely to challenge several protection dogs than a single dog. This is especially important when wolf packs, grizzlies and cougars are the prevalent threats.
The Akbash is uncommon as a companion dog. When trained appropriately from puppyhood on, they will get along with other domestic species. Since the Akbash has been bred to think on its own, dogs of this breed can be a challenge to train for obedience exercises. They have been bred not to chase their charges, so they tend not to be as interested in chasing balls or in games of fetch. They prefer large areas and may become discontent and exhibit problem behaviors, like escaping or being destructive, if relegated to a pen or small yard. Akbash Dogs require tall secure fencing for best containment. The Akbash is not a dog for everyone. It is a working breed and is happiest when given a job compatible to its breeding, or at the least, when kept mentally engaged.  These dogs are known for their intelligence, bravery, independence and loyalty.
