
== Notable Rough Collies ==

Lassie, a line of Rough Collies originally owned by Rudd Weatherwax that have starred in numerous films, multiple television series, a radio program, and has been the subject of various novels and non-fiction works. One of the few animal actors to have a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
Reveille is the name of the current mascot of Texas A&M University. Since Reveille III became mascot in 1966, each dog to bear that name has been a Rough Collie; the current mascot is Reveille IX. When she assumed her duties in 2015, she was formerly named Twix. She was donated by breeders Marcy and Mike Fine, Overland Collies, from Chagrin Falls, Ohio, a Cleveland suburb.
Dog, John Wayne's four-legged sidekick in the 1971 film Big Jake. 
DR Dakota, was the collie that performed the action shots in the latest Lassie film.
Lad, the main hero of Albert Payson Terhune's early 20th-century novels about his Sunnybank Rough Collies.
Pal, the first Rough Collie to portray Lassie and from whom the Lassie line is descended.
Ch. Laund Loyalty of Bellhaven, a nine-month-old Rough Collie who is the youngest dog to ever win the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show.
Colleen, a Rough Collie from London (voiced by Tress MacNeille) on Road Rovers.
Jezebel, is a Rough Collie (voiced by Fergie) in the 2010 movie, Marmaduke.
Chester McDoogle, is a Rough Collie that appeared in the promos for Chadwick Stokes album Simmerkane II of State Radio and Dispatch fame.
Wilson, a Rough Collie who appears in the Japanese manga series Ginga: Nagareboshi Gin.
The helpful Rough Collie (voiced by Tom Conway), from 101 Dalmatians. He leads Pongo, Perdita and the puppies into the safety of a dairy farm somewhere in Hertfordshire.
Sledge, a member of Riley's gang in Homeward Bound II: Lost in San-Francisco, the 1996 sequel to Homeward Bound: The Incredible Journey. She is voiced by Tisha Campbell-Martin.
Flo, Charlie B. Barkin's girlfriend (voiced by Loni Anderson) in the 1989 Don Bluth film, All Dogs Go to Heaven.
Rob Roy and Prudence Prim, famous snow-white Rough Collies owned by President Calvin and First Lady Gracie Coolidge.
Laddie, a parody of Lassie on The Simpsons, in the episode entitled The Canine Mutiny.
Zeb, a dog from Olney, Maryland popular in the mid-Atlantic states as a "spokesdog" for Collie Rescue.
Mason, who portrayed the last "Lassie" in the latest Lassie film.
Trigger, who portrayed in two parts of Goosebumps episodes, Monster Blood.
Kep, who belongs to Beatrix Potter and appears in The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck.
The Circus Rough Collie
