
== History ==

The Shiloh Shepherd was developed by Tina M. Barber of Shiloh Shepherds (kennel) in New York, United States.  In 1974, she began developing a new line of German Shepherd Dog.  Her goal was to preserve the type of dog she remembered from her childhood in Germany: dogs that are good family companions, intelligent, both physically and mentally sound, and large in size.Tina separated her foundation stock from the American Kennel Club (AKC) in 1990, and the FIC (Federation of International Canines) agreed to register these dogs as a separate breed. (FIC, which has appeared on multiple warning lists of bogus, "puppy mill" pedigree registries, is not to be confused with the world-recognized Fédération Cynologique Internationale, FCI.)  The name chosen for these dogs was  "Shiloh Shepherd" after the kennel of origin. Shortly thereafter, the Shiloh Shepherd Dog Club of America (SSDCA) was formed to preserve and protect the future welfare of the breed. In 1991, the International Shiloh Shepherd Registry (ISSR) was established and took over registry functions from the FIC.In 1993, The Complete Computer Place (TCCP), using a specially designed database program, officially started maintaining breeding records.  This program tracked nine generations of pedigree and LMX (Littermate X-Ray Program) data and computerized all the older paper files. The ISSR used this program to document vital data on each Shiloh Shepherd in its registry.  Tina Barber was active in the development of the breed as the President of the SSDCA, Inc. and Breed Warden for the ISSR. Tina Barber died at the age of 63 on May 30, 2011 in Warsaw, New York.  Lisa Barber (daughter) has assumed the role of Breed Warden and Registrar of the ISSR since the death of her mother.
In 1997, during a period when the SSDCA was inactive, The International Shiloh Shepherd Dog Club (ISSDC) was opened.  In  1998, the ISSDC opened their own registry, calling it the ISSDCr.  The Shiloh Shepherd Breed Association (SSBA) was opened shortly after and assumed registry functions for the ISSDCr.  The National Shiloh Breed Registry (NSBR) was established in 2001 and The Shiloh Shepherd Registry (TSSR) in 2002.  In 2004, the ISSDC was reorganized as a parent club for the NSBR, the SSBA, and the TSSR.  In June 2009, the SSBA was closed.There are significant differences of opinion between the founding club and registry and subsequently established clubs and registries as to how best serve the breed.
