
== In popular culture ==
Belle, from Cécile Aubry's Belle et Sébastien novel is a Great Pyrenees.
The 2004 film Finding Neverland used a Great Pyrenees to represent J. M. Barrie's Landseer Newfoundland dog.
In the television series, King of Queens, a Great Pyrenees is a recurring customer of Holly the dog walker.
In the 1965 film Those Magnificent Men in their Flying Machines, a Great Pyrenees is the household dog at the Lord Rawnsley estate.
In the Marx Brothers' Horse Feathers, a Great Pyrenees appears in the dog catcher's wagon.
In the Korean variety show Happy Sunday - 1 Night 2 Days, Sang Geun, a Great Pyrenees, is the mascot of the show and recently appointed as "Nation's Pet".
A popular Korean singer, Hero Jaejoong from TVXQ owns a Great Pyrenees named Vick.
In the 2009 Disney movie Santa Buddies, a Great Pyrenees puppy named Puppy Paws is the leading character.
Barry Gibb of the Bee Gees owned a Great Pyrenees named Barnaby who was in their television movie Cucumber Castle and the video for their song "Lonely Days".
In the Jim Carrey movie Dumb and Dumber, a Great Pyrenees appears in the dog-mobile.
Webcomic artist Jeph Jacques owns a Great Pyrenees named Shelby, who has appeared in his webcomic Questionable Content on occasion. He appears almost exactly the same as Mr. Tadakichi of anime fame (see below).
In Hanazakari no Kimitachi e, the male lead had a Great Pyrenees named "Yu Ci Lan" for a pet.
Many Japanese manga and anime series have dogs that are either this breed or based on its appearance:
Alexander from Fullmetal Alchemist is a large Great Pyrenees who is the pet of Shou Tucker. Alexander is later combined with Shou's daughter Nina to form a Chimera.
Tadakichi-san (Mr. Tadakichi in the English version), owned by Chiyo Mihama in Azumanga Daioh
Akamaru from Naruto is Kiba Inuzuka's pet Great Pyrenees.
Cherry, owned by Minami Iwasaki in Lucky Star.
Baron from Noein: To Your Other Self is Haruka Kaminogi's pet Great Pyrenees.
Peace, a dog belonging to one of Ashirogi Muto's assistants appears in Bakuman.
The Japanese series Ginga Densetsu Weed features a Great Pyrenees named Hiro, who is nicknamed "The Castrator", due to his signature attack of neutering his opponents.
In the book Between Mom and Jo by Julie Anne Peters, the family takes in a stray Great Pyrenees.
In the book Futures and Frosting by Tara Sivec, Carter's parents buy him, Claire and Gavin a Great Pyrenees puppy. Claire exaggeratingly describes it as a "900-pound animal", "almost the same size as Gavin" and "looks like a polar bear".
The logo of the Sea Dog Brewing Company represents the founders' late Great Pyrenees.
During the live simulcast of the Stephanie Miller Show radio show on Free Speech TV, Stephanie's two Great Pyrenees, Max and Fred, are often seen on camera and are a subject of discussion.
In 2014 a Great Pyrenees known as Duke the Dog became mayor of a small Minnesota town Cormorant.
