
== Today ==
Like all spitz dogs in general, the Swedish lapphund demands a stable upbringing and both regular mental and physical stimulation to perform at its best.
As a working dog they show their versatility in a number of different fields.
Many compete with success in such widely different disciplines as obedience,
dog agility trials, working contest, freestyle/heelwork to music, Rally obedience, and blood
tracking. The Swedish Lapphund can also participate in herding events. Herding instincts and trainability can be measured at noncompetitive herding tests. Lapphunds exhibiting basic herding instincts can be trained to compete in herding trials.The breed also has a number of certificated search and rescue dogs and army dogs. The Swedish lapphund is also a very multifaceted hunting dog, mainly used for hunting elk and forest birds, but also deer, wild boar
and bear. It is also a skilled tracking dog in searching for wounded or killed game. In addition to their versatility as working animals, the breed is also extremely popular as a competitive show dog.
In Sweden dogs have their temperament tested by a system called mentalbeskrivning. Results for the Swedish lapphund show a curious, intrepid,
and friendly breed which is playful and non-aggressive.
They are easily trained, strong, and very devoted to their family. Early training is essential to prevent excessive barking.
The Swedish lapphund is a typical spitz. It is rectangularly built, slightly under
medium size with a good carriage. It moves effortless with drive, light, springy
and covering ground. Despite that they are gifted with a dense and long, shining
coat, they are very easy to groom. Some brushings when the coat is shedding is
enough to keep the coat in good condition.The special coat does not smell doggy
and is cleans itself from dirt, so it requires little maintenance. The coat colour is
black or bear brown, sometimes with white marks on tail, chest and feet. It has a
profuse double coat with hair standing straight out from the body; undercoat is
dense and very finely curled. Coat colours are mostly black and liver, but a white patch on the chest is also common.
