
== Temperament ==

The Croatian Sheepdog is an alert, agile, keen and intelligent dog with enormous energy and with a strong need for human companionship.  It is healthy, resistant to disease and not expensive to keep.  It possesses a well-developed herding instinct and is an excellent watchdog.
It's a caring and modest shepherd's dog, very loyal to their master.
The breed also possesses an hereditary predisposition for working cattle. Some farmers affirm that their Croatian Sheepdog knows and will single out every head of cattle by hearing its name.
In the past, the dog was often used to drive herds of pigs to oak woods in autumn, and, in one old document, it states that this versatile breed even herded the horses from Đakovo's stables.
It is both a driving and a gathering dog and, depending on whether it comes from a show or working line, its desire to work stock varies. Its approach to the flock may be closer and harder than some other breeds, but is very effective. It may grip but seldom causes any damage thereby. Nevertheless, it requires firm but sensitive handling and it is easy to overcome these aggressive tendencies by training. The breed is very intense and may bark a lot during the early stages of training, but, with experience, it will usually only bark at the right time - mostly when working in yards. This dog usually obeys only one person and an older sheepdog may take some time to switch allegiance to a new master. If not socialized early, it can be wary of strangers.
The Croatian Sheepdog responds well to obedience training but as a pet without any work it can become very noisy, even destructive. It is, however, a very docile breed and comprehends quickly what is expected of it, which it accomplishes with pleasure. At around 3 or 4 months the pup is usually taken to the flock. In most cases, these pups are worked beside an older dog, and the pup learns its job and at around 6 months is useful for work.
It is always behind its master's heels, waiting for the next move and often looks into its master's eyes as it asks "What next?"
Nowadays, fewer and fewer Croatian Sheepdogs earn their keep by working with stock in native Slavonia, because many open plains are put to crops and stock is kept indoors.
Croatian Sheepdogs do well in an apartment as long as they get enough regular exercise.
