
== Culture ==


=== Art ===

Before 1950, the formal visual arts were a minor aspect of Newfoundland cultural life, compared to the performing arts such as music or theatre. Until about 1900, most art was the work of visiting artists, who included members of the Group of Seven, Rockwell Kent, and Eliot O'Hara. Artists such as Newfoundland-born Maurice Cullen and Robert Pilot traveled to Europe to study art in prominent ateliers. 
By the turn of the century, amateur art was made by people living and working in the province. These artists included J.W. Hayward and his son Thomas B. Hayward, Agnes Marian Ayre, and Harold B. Goodridge, the last of whom worked on a number of mural commissions, notably one for the lobby of the Confederation Building in St. John's. Local art societies became prominent in the 1940s, particularly The Art Students Club, which opened in 1940.After Newfoundland and Labrador joined Canada in 1949, government grants fostered a supportive environment for visual artists, primarily painters. The visual arts of the province developed significantly in the second half of the century, with the return of young Newfoundland artists who had studied abroad. Among the first were Rae Perlin, who studied at the Art Students League in New York, and Helen Parsons Shepherd and her husband Reginald Shepherd, who both graduated from the Ontario College of Art. The Shepherds established the province's first art school, the Newfoundland Academy of Art, in a home in downtown St. John's.Newfoundland-born painter Christopher Pratt returned to the province in 1961 with his wife Mary Pratt to work at the newly established Memorial University Art Gallery as its first curator, later transitioning to painting full-time in Salmonier. Wesleyville's David Blackwood graduated from the Ontario College of Art in the early 1960s and achieved acclaim with his images of Newfoundland culture and history, though he no longer resides in the province. Newfoundland-born artist Gerald Squires returned in 1969.The creation of The Memorial University Extension Services and St. Michael's Printshop in the 1960s and 1970s attracted a number of visual artist to the province to teach and create art. Similarly, the school in Hibbs Hole (now Hibb's Cove), established by painter George Noseworthy, brought professional artists such as Anne Meredith Barry to the province. A notable artist during this period is Marlene Creates.From 1980 to present, opportunities for artists continued to develop, as galleries such as the Art Gallery of Newfoundland and Labrador (which later became The Rooms Provincial Art Gallery), the Resource Centre for the Arts, and Eastern Edge were established. Fine arts education programs were established at post-secondary institutions such as Sir Wilfred Grenfell College in Corner Brook, the Western Community College (now College of the North Atlantic) in Stephenville, and the Anna Templeton Centre in St. John's.Newfoundland and Labrador's arts community is recognized nationally and internationally. The creation of Fogo Island Arts in 2008 on Fogo Island created a residency-based contemporary art program for artists, filmmakers, writers, musicians, curators, designers, and thinkers. In 2013 and 2015, the province was represented at the Venice Biennale as Official Collateral Projects. In 2015, Philippa Jones became the first Newfoundland and Labrador artist to be included in the National Gallery of Canada contemporary art biennial. Other notable contemporary artists who have received national and international attention include Will Gill, Kym Greeley, Ned Pratt and Peter Wilkins.
As of 2011, a study documented approximately 1,200 artists, representing 0.47% of the province's labour force.


=== Music ===

Newfoundland and Labrador has a folk musical heritage based on the Irish, English and Scottish traditions that were brought to its shores centuries ago. Though similar in its Celtic influence to neighbouring Nova Scotia and Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland and Labrador are more Irish than Scottish, and have more elements imported from English and French music than those provinces. Much of the region's music focuses on the strong seafaring tradition in the area, and includes sea shanties and other sailing songs. Some modern traditional musicians include Great Big Sea, The Ennis Sisters, The Dardanelles, Ron Hynes, and Jim Payne.
The Newfoundland Symphony Orchestra began in St John's in 1962 as a 20-piece string orchestra known as the St. John's Orchestra. Principals from this form a string quartet which performs regularly. A school of music at Memorial University schedules a variety of concerts and has a chamber orchestra and jazz band. Two members of its faculty, Nancy Dahn on violin and Timothy Steeves on piano, perform as Duo Concertante and are responsible for establishing an annual music festival in August, the Tuckamore Festival. Both the school of music and Opera on the Avalon produce operatic works. Memorial's Research Centre for the Study of Music, Media, and Place, houses Memorial's graduate program in ethnomusicology. A leading institution for research in ethnomusicology, the Centre offers academic lectures, scholarly residencies, conferences, symposia, and outreach activities to the province on music and culture.


=== Literature ===


==== Prose fiction ====
Margaret Duley (1894–1968) was arguably Newfoundland's first novelist to gain an international audience. Amongst her works are The Eyes of the Gull (1936), Cold Pastoral (1939} and Highway to Valour (1941). Subsequent important novelists include Harold Horwood, who wrote Tomorrow Will Be Sunday (1966) and White Eskimo (1972), and Percy Janes, author of House of Hate (1970).Notable contemporary novelists include Michael Crummey, Wayne Johnston, Lisa Moore, and Kenneth J. Harvey.

Crummey's debut novel, River Thieves (2001), became a Canadian bestseller and won the Thomas Head Raddall Award, the Winterset Award for Excellence in Newfoundland Writing, and the Atlantic Independent Booksellers' Choice Award. It was also shortlisted for the Giller Prize, the Commonwealth Writers' Prize, and the Books in Canada First Novel Award, as well as being longlisted for the International Dublin Literary Award. His second novel, The Wreckage (2005), was longlisted for the 2007 International Dublin Literary Award, and his third novel, Galore (2009), was shortlisted for the 2011 International Dublin Literary Award.Johnston's fiction deals primarily with the province of Newfoundland and Labrador, often in a historical setting. His first novel, The Story of Bobby O'Malley, brought him early critical notice and won the W.H. Smith/Books in Canada First Novel Award in 1985. His second novel, The Time of Their Lives, won the Air Canada/Canadian Authors Association Award for Most Promising Young Canadian Writer in 1988. His novel The Divine Ryans won the 1991 Thomas Head Raddall Award and was subsequently adapted for the screen. His breakthrough novel, 1998's The Colony of Unrequited Dreams – shortlisted for both the Giller Prize and the Governor General's Award for fiction – was acclaimed for its historical portrayal of legendary Newfoundland politician Joey Smallwood. It was featured on the cover of the New York Times Book Review when it was released in the United States, and was an international best seller. The Colony of Unrequited Dreams won or was nominated for sixteen national and international awards. In 2002, Johnston published The Navigator of New York, which was shortlisted for both the Giller Prize and the Governor General's Award for fiction. Johnston was awarded the Writers' Trust Engel/Findley Award  in recognition of his contribution to Canadian Literature in 2011. Several of Johnston's books have been published in the United States, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Germany and China.Harvey is a novelist whose books are published throughout the world. Amongst these are The Town That Forgot How to Breathe (2003), which won the 2004 Thomas Head Raddall Award and Italy's Libro del Mare), Inside (2006), long listed for the Giller Prize), winner of the Rogers Writers' Trust Fiction Prize, and the Winterset Award, and Blackstrap Hawco (2008), which was longlisted for the Giller Prize), and shortlisted for the Commonwealth Writers Prize.
Moore's first two books, Degrees of Nakedness (1995) and Open (2002), are short-story collections. Open was a commercial and critical breakthrough, earning a nomination for the Giller Prize. Her first novel, Alligator (2005), was also nominated for the Giller Prize. It won the 2006 Commonwealth Writers' Prize Best Book Award, Caribbean and Canada Region, and was longlisted for the 2007 International Dublin Literary Award. Moore often incorporates her Newfoundland heritage in her work; Alligator, for example, is set in St. John's.
February tells the story of Helen O'Mara, who lost her husband Cal when the oil rig, Ocean Ranger, sank off the coast of Newfoundland during a Valentine's Day storm in 1982. Moore was one of 13 novelists on the long list for the 2010 Booker Prize for her novel February,


==== Poetry ====
The earliest works of poetry in British North America, mainly written by visitors and targeted at a European audience, described the new territories in optimistic terms. One of the first works was Robert Hayman's Quodlibets, a collection of verses composed in Newfoundland and published in 1628.

After World War II, Newfoundland poet E. J. Pratt described the struggle to make a living from the sea in poems about maritime life and the history of Canada. In 1923, his first commercial poetry collection, Newfoundland Verse, was released. It is frequently archaic in diction, and reflects a pietistic and late-Romantic lyrical sensibility. The collection has humorous and sympathetic portraits of Newfoundland characters, and creates an elegiac mood in poems concerning sea tragedies or Great War losses. With illustrations by Group of Seven member Frederick Varley, Newfoundland Verse proved to be Pratt's "breakthrough collection." He went on to publish 18 more books of poetry in his lifetime. "Recognition came with the narrative poems The Witches’ Brew (1925), Titans (1926), and The Roosevelt and the Antinoe (1930), and though he published a substantial body of lyric verse, it is as a narrative poet that Pratt is remembered."  Pratt's poetry "frequently reflects his Newfoundland background, though specific references to it appear in relatively few poems, mostly in Newfoundland Verse," says The Canadian Encyclopedia. "But the sea and maritime life are central to many of his poems, for example, "The Cachalot" (1926), which describes duels between a whale and its foes, a giant squid and a whaling ship and crew.Amongst more recent poets are Tom Dawe, Al Pittman, Mary Dalton, Agnes Walsh, Patrick Warner and John Steffler. Canadian poet Don McKay has resided in St John's in recent years.


==== Playwrights ====
"1967 marked the opening of the St. John's Arts and Culture Centre and the first all-Canadian Dominion Drama Festival. Playwrights across Canada began writing, and this explosion was also felt in Newfoundland and Labrador. Subregional festivals saw Newfoundland plays compete - Wreakers by Cassie Brown, Tomorrow Will Be Sunday by Tom Cahill, and Holdin' Ground by Ted Russell. Cahill's play went on to receive top honours and a performance at Expo 67 in Montreal. Joining Brown and Cahill in the seventies were Michael Cook and Al Pittman, both prolific writers".


=== Languages spoken in the Province ===

Newfoundland English is any of several accents and dialects of English found in the province of Newfoundland and Labrador. Most of these differ substantially from the English commonly spoken elsewhere in neighbouring Canada and the North Atlantic.  Many Newfoundland dialects are similar to the West Country dialects of the West Country in England, particularly the city of Bristol and counties Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Hampshire and Somerset, while others resemble dialects of Ireland's southeast, particularly Waterford, Wexford, Kilkenny and Cork. Still others blend elements of both, and there is also a Scottish  influence on the dialects. While the Scots came in smaller numbers than the English and Irish, they had a large influence on Newfoundland society.Newfoundland was also the only place outside Europe to have its own distinct name in Irish: Talamh an Éisc, which means 'land of the fish'. The Irish language is now extinct in Newfoundland. Scots Gaelic was also once spoken in the southwest of Newfoundland, following the settlement there, from the middle of the 19th century, of small numbers of Gaelic-speaking Scots from Cape Breton, Nova Scotia. Some 150 years later, the language has not entirely disappeared, although it has no fluent speakers.A vestigial community of French speakers exists on Newfoundland's Port au Port Peninsula; a remnant of the "French Shore" along the island's west coast.Several aboriginal languages are spoken in the Province, representing the Algonquian (Beothuk, Mi'kmaq and Innu) and Eskimo-Aleut (Inuktitut) language families.See Dictionary of Newfoundland English, 2d ed
