
== Appearance ==
As a working dog, Catahoulas have been bred primarily for temperament and ability rather than for appearance. As a result, the physical characteristics of the Catahoula are somewhat varied.


=== Size ===
Catahoulas may range greatly in size with males averaging slightly larger than females. Typical height ranges from 20–26 inches (51–66 cm) and weight from 40–112 pounds (18–51 kg).


=== Color ===

Catahoulas come in many different colors including blue merle, red merle, brindle, and solid colors. Often, solid coat Catahoulas have small splashes of other colors such as white on their face, legs or chest. The leopard-like coat of most Catahoulas is the result of the merle gene. The merle gene does not normally affect the entire coat of the dog, but dilutes the color only in areas that randomly present the characteristic of the gene. Visually, white coats seem unaffected.

Red Leopard: These are various shades of brown and tan, may also have white. Known as "red merle" in other breeds.
Blue Leopard: These are various shades of dark greys, black and some may also have white (generally on the feet and chest). Known as "blue merle" in other breeds.
Black or Black Leopard: These are leopards least affected by the merle gene but will display smaller patches of blue or gray.
Gray or Silver Leopard: Blue Leopards where the black color has been diluted to gray. Known as "slate merle" in other breeds.
Tri-color: Catahoulas with three distinct visible colors, usually white, black, and gray.
Quad-color: These are Catahoulas with the varying body colorations and trim colors that help to designate the number of colors present on the dogs. Gray Catahoulas may be considered a Quad-color when White and Tan trim are included. This dog would display Black, Gray, White, usually around the neck, face, feet, and tail, and Tan, which may also appear around the face and feet. Most Five-colored dogs are misnamed Quad-colored dogs.
Patchwork: These Catahoulas are predominantly white dogs with small amounts of solid and/or merle patches appearing throughout the coat. The colored patches may be black or brown. Dilution may affect those colored patches and produce gray, blue, red, or liver coloration within them.


=== Coat ===

The texture of a Catahoula's coat may show some variance, being slick/painted-on, spotted, or coarse.  All registering bodies that recognize the Catahoula specify a short or slick-coated dog. 
Slick coat: This is the most common coat type, featuring fur that is very short and lies close to the body. Such coats dry very rapidly, and because of this, the dog can be cleaned and ready in a matter of minutes.  It is often referred to as a "Wash n' Wear" coat.
Coarse coat: This coat is a little longer and fuller than others. It does not require complex maintenance; however, these dogs are not quick to dry when wet. Dogs with this type of coat will often display "feathers" seen on the rear legs, tail, and underbelly, giving them a "fluffy" appearance.


=== Eyes ===
The breed may have "cracked glass" or "marbled glass" eyes (heterochromia) and occurs when both colored and glass portions are present in the same eye. Cracked glass or marbled glass eyes are blue or blue-white in color. Catahoulas with two cracked glass or marble glass eyes are often referred to as having double glass eyes. In some cases, a glass eye will have darker colored sections in it, and vice versa. Cracked glass eyes may be half of one color and half of another. They may just have a streak or spot of another color. Gray eyes are usually cracked glass eyes, made of blue and green, giving them their grayish appearance. The eyes may be of the same color or each of a different color. Eye color can also be ice blue, brown, green, gray, or amber. No particular eye color is typical of Catahoulas. Some have been known to have half of one eye marbled.


=== Tail ===
The tail of the Catahoula may be long and whip-like, reaching past the hocks of the back legs, or else bobtail, which is a tail that ranges from one vertebra shorter than full length to only one vertebra in total length. The question mark tail is a common tail trait, often with a white tip. The bobtail is a rare but natural part of the Catahoula heritage.


=== Feet ===
Though most dogs have webbing between the toes, Catahoulas' feet have more prominent webbing which extends almost to the ends of the toes. This foot gives the Catahoula the ability to work marshy areas and gives them great swimming ability.
