
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===
The length from the withers to the base of the tail is about 36 inches, with a chest which is deep but not very wide across the shoulders, and with well-sprung ribs. The tail is long and tapering slightly curving upwards and carried low; it is about 24"–27" in length. The neck, about 12 inches in circumference, is long, arched, and muscular, and rather broad where it joins the body. The roughly 9-inch-long jaws are expected to exhibit a powerful scissor bite. The males measure 60–75 cm (24–30 in) in height. The females measure 55–60 cm (22–24 in) in height. They weigh about 27–30 kg (60–65 lb).
They are approximately the same height as most other greyhounds, but much wider and more muscular, somewhat similar to the Rhodesian Ridgeback. The head of the Rampur is broader and more substantial than the head of the English Greyhound. It has a flat skull and a pointed nose. It also has a characteristic roman bend. Their ears are high-set on their head and held in a rose or pendant fashion. The Rampur's foot is a large "hare" shape, with heavy webbing. Their toes are very articulated and flexible, even able to bend backwards a bit. They are not unlike our own fingers in many ways. This maneuverability helps to give them a cat-like balance, with most dogs able to walk on ledges or to calmly clear a six-foot fence. Colors include mouse-gray, grizzle, brindle, particolor or, rarely, black. The gray and grizzle colorings in particular have the ability to blend particularly well with forest foliage, capable of making the dogs difficult to spot from a distance of as little as ten feet, in broad daylight. Black, however, is the most sought-after color of dog by many enthusiasts. Their eye color ranges from yellow to golden-brown.


=== Temperament ===
The breed loves human companionship, and like most sighthounds tends to keep itself clean and well-groomed. They may appear lazy but will charge if needed. The Rampur in play can be a scary thing to the uninitiated. They like to charge at each other at speed, then butt their chests with extensive force. They are affectionate to their owners, almost to a fault.  Even so, the Rampur Hound is still a commanding breed and makes an excellent guard-dog. Generally gentle and sensitive around its own family's children, the Rampur nonetheless tends to be a one-person dog, and has been known to display protective instincts. At times they can also be rambunctious and prone to knocking people over in their enthusiasm. They can sometimes be aggressive with other dogs.
Before obtaining a Rampur Hound, size and exercise requirements should be taken into consideration. Relatively robust, it needs plenty of space to stretch its legs and probably would be not be happy to be confined to a small apartment.
