
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===
At 15-17 lb (7–8 kg), it is the smallest of the long legged, black and tan terriers. The Lakeland is similar in appearance to the slightly larger Welsh Terrier and is finer-boned. The largest of the threesome in this similar group of Terriers is the Airedale. The Lakeland is a sturdy dog, compact, free moving and able to cover ground with little effort and much quickness. 
The dog is relatively narrow in the chest and has a broad muzzle, yet slightly narrower than the Welsh Terrier, with small, V-shaped ears.
The Lakeland breed has a thick bushy wiry outer coat and a soft undercoat. It comes in a variety of colors though The Kennel Club lists the following as 'Acceptable colours for registration': Black, Black and Tan, Blue and Tan, Dark Grizzle, Grizzle, Grizzle and Tan, Liver and Tan, Red, Red Grizzle, Wheaten.  They have an upright tail which was previously customarily docked. Lakeland Terriers grow to between 33 and 38 cm (13 to 15 inches) in height measured to the withers. 
The eyes are small and dark colored and of oval shape. The nose and pads of the feet are black except in liver colored dogs where the nose and pad coloring will be liver colored.  Liver colored dogs will have a slightly lighter colored eye. The dog will not shed if properly groomed. It is suggested that "Regular stripping and trimming improves the texture and quality of the coat" and is "necessary to enhance the dog's utilitarian purposes" as well as "enhancing him for the show ring".


=== Temperament ===
The dogs are friendly, bold, and confident. Shyness is very atypical, as is aggressiveness. Very intelligent and independent minded, they are quick to learn and easy to train though Lakelands often exhibit 'selective deafness' when their interest level is aroused. The Lakeland is quite receptive to crate training. As with most terriers, the Lakeland is energetic; daily exercise and playtimes are a must, lest this active dog seek other outlets for their energy, with undesirable results for the owner.
