
== Care ==


=== Exercise requirements ===

Norwich Terriers are hardy, active dogs, bred for a working life of pursuing vermin and accompanying their farmer owners on horseback.  A good daily walk is therefore the minimum needed to meet the exercise requirements of a healthy Norwich Terrier.  Norwich Terriers compete in Earthdog competitions, and are increasingly common in Agility and Flyball competitions. The dogs were bred as working terriers, and thrive best with at least one hour of real activity daily, such as a good walk, run, or working session.


=== Grooming ===
The Norwich Terrier has two coats - a harsh, wiry topcoat and a soft warm undercoat. Ideally, the coat is combed  with a steel comb daily to once a week to remove the loose, dead hairs and prevent matting. Proper maintenance of the Norwich coat, like other hard wiry coats, requires "stripping," or pulling the oldest hairs from the coat (using fingers and/or a "stripping knife," a special grooming comb).  Stripping results both in the coat retaining its proper appearance, and in the health of the dog's skin and coat. Ideally, owners hand-strip the coat on a regular basis to achieve what is called a "rolling" coat, where hairs of all lengths are growing in.  Maintaining a rolling coat is easier on the dog's skin and requires shorter grooming sessions.  At minimum, the coat should be stripped once in the autumn and once in the spring. Clipping or cutting negatively affects the appearance of the coat's natural colours and texture.


=== Tail docking ===

Only the American Kennel Club calls for a medium docked (long enough for a man's hand to grasp) tail, though a natural tail is not a disqualification.   In Australia and Canada tail docking is optional, but in New South Wales, it is illegal. In the United Kingdom, tail docking is only permitted for working dogs and is banned for dogs bred as pets or showing. Other countries that have banned tail docking include: Norway in 1987, and Sweden in 1988. In the last four years Cyprus, Greece, Luxembourg and Switzerland have also decided to introduce a ban on tail docking.Historically, tails were docked in the UK to avoid taxation of sporting dogs. Today, proponents of tail docking argue working Norwich Terriers should have a docked tail because there is less risk of damaging the tail or spine if it is used to extract the dog from a hole.  Some proponents suggest the docked tail makes for a prettier breed silhouette.  Opponents of tail docking note that docking severely damages the important canine tail-signalling system, so vital to dogs' social communication.  Where form follows function, the tail assists the dog with balance for movement over rough terrain and turning at speed.  Arguments for and against tail docking are covered in this Michigan State University (Detroit College of Law) paper, including "History":
