
== Sub-variants and types ==
The Kuchi dogs can roughly be divided into three types: the Mountain-type, the Steppe-type, and the Desert-type.

The mountain-type dogs form a very large-boned, heavy coated variety that is well suited to living in the mountainous regions of the Pamir range. They are usually found at higher elevations, where there is greater humidity and more extreme, cool temperatures.
The steppe-type dogs are of much lighter built, with medium to long hair. They are faster and more agile on expansive flats than the mountain variety. They can be characterized as having a mastiff-like built combined with a sighthound appearance.
The desert-type dogs represent a variant most often found in the large desert flatlands, with little vegetation and a hotter climate. They are of medium height, with a short to medium length coat backed by very thick underwool during the cold season. They can possess characteristics of both of the other types, especially when it comes to the head structure.Another way to classify the Kuchi dog could be according to a lion-type (Djence Sheri), or a tiger-type (Djence Palangi). This division applies mostly to the desert-type dogs, but it is important to keep in mind that each of the regional variants can display characteristics found in other types as well.

The lion-type dogs are of heavier built, with larger heads and deeper chests. Their coat is usually thicker, and they are of medium height with a larger, bear-type head.
The tiger-type dogs are the more athletic looking, with a long and deep habitus, brick or wedge shaped head, and shorter coat. They are more often linked with Steppe-type dogs.The difference between the two can also be seen in the way they move. The Lion-type dogs are more majestic in motion, they appear very proud thanks to keeping their heads raised while they walk.
The tiger type dogs exhibit more of a sidewinding, catlike motion, with the head usually at the level of the body, and front paws swinging inwards when walking, running, or jumping.
Both types are extremely agile and possess tremendous speed and tenacity when running or attacking.
