
== Variants ==

The Khalag Tazi is a variety of the Afghan. It was introduced to Europe in 1920 when an Indian Army officer, Major G Bell-Murray, brought some animals back from Afghanistan. Tazi is a current and ancient name for hunting dogs of the sighthound type in the Middle East. It has been used to denote the Saluki, Afghan, Taigan, Persian Greyhound, greyhound types of hound.


=== Bakhmull ===

Bakhmull or bakhmull tazi is a long haired variety of sighthounds, bred mostly in Russia and claimed to represent a Afghan Hound aboriginal to Afghanistan. In Pashto the word "bakhmull" means "velvet" due to  its incredible silky velvet, long, ivory color hair of the coat, rather abundant and long on the whole body, because it is a mountain oriental sighthound, except the "saddle", front parts of four  legs and the muzzle. Its color is always fawn, ivory or white with a darker "saddle",  thus it produces an impression of a fawn (yellowish) dog which coat color is protective khaki that matches sandstone  and limestone of the Hindu Kush mountain landscape and deserts. Following colors are not permissible: red, red with white spots, black and black with white spots. Since the 1980s the centre of Bakhmull breeding is in Russia, "The Blue Dale el Bark Bakhmull"  Moscow, where they are spread all over  the former Soviet Republics and various regions. Natalia Gherasiova  established "The Blue Dale el Bark" and later "The National club Bakhmull" attached to RFOS (Russian Federation for Hunting Dogs) and RKF. The foundation stock was brought to Russia in the 70s by military men from Afghanistan. Breed Standard for tazi BAKHMULL (aboriginal Afghan Hound)  was adopted in Moscow, Russia (since Russia has become the 2nd motherland of bakhmulls) first in 1985 and later after detailed elaboration  in 1997 (RFOS-RKF).Bakhmull  is graceful and powerful, well balanced in conformation and in mind, of perfect symmetry, beautiful and noble, aggressive  to beasts and generous to people, intelligent and affectionate, joyous, calm at home and alert and reckless in field, devoted to people and with good guard qualities.  Though its coat is long, it does not require much grooming. Paws are well protected from  injuries by feathering. Long velvet coat and stamina makes it possible to withstand severe weather.   Aristocratic carriage and  a beautiful  head  with gazelle-like large, brown slanting upwards eyes of almond shape, eye rims outlined black, emphasizing  oriental origin. The expression  of the eyes is considerate, tranquil and intelligent.   Black colour of  eye rims, nose and lips is a must  for a light fawn bakhmull. Height : 68–73 cm (27-28.5 in.), bitches 65–70 cm (25.5-27.5 in.).  A must for bakhmull is upstanding, the height in withers is 3–4 cm higher than in croup. Bakhmull's gait is easy and springy. Searching for a prey bakhmull walks or jog-trots. After seeing  the beast it immediately starts galloping very fast  with a whole body, covering long distances, overcoming obstacles on the way, showing great jumping power, speed and manoeuvring, making steeple chase,  changing the direction all of a sudden with a great skill. While galloping fast bakhmull makes a ball of a body, providing a great power of push shove.
Natalia Gherasiova used strong intuition  and her knowledge of the bakhmull’s exterior  and  functions to guide breed selection.
