
== In popular culture ==

General George S. Patton owned a Bull Terrier named Willie, and a portrayal of him is featured in the 1970 movie Patton.
In Charles Dickens' Oliver Twist (1838), Bill Sikes' dog "Bullseye" is a Bull Terrier.
In Ernest Thompson Seton's book Animal Heroes (1905) there is a story Snap about a fearless Bull Terrier named Gingersnap which helps North Dakota ranchers to kill wolves.
In the TV show Baa Baa Black Sheep Major Gregory Boyington, played Robert Conrad, owns a Bull Terrier named "Meatball" which also serves as the squadron mascot for VMF-214.
The New Yorker cartoonist George Booth drew what he "thought looked like a mean dog", and after a fan asked if it represented "an English Bull Terrier", he researched the breed's appearance and made his further versions of it a mainstay of his cartoons.
The short film Frankenweenie (1984) and its full-length remake Frankenweenie (2012), both directed by Tim Burton, feature a Bull Terrier named "Sparky".
From 1987 to 1989, Budweiser's beer commercials featured a female Bull Terrier named "Spuds MacKenzie".
The book The Incredible Journey by author Sheila Burnford features a Bull Terrier named "Bodger", as well as in the 1963 film.
The 1993 Nickelodeon cartoon Rocko's Modern Life features a bull terrier named "Spunky", who is Rocko's pet dog.
The 1995 film Toy Story features a mean Bull Terrier named "Scud".
In Babe: Pig in the City, one of the two savage dogs who chases Babe is a Bull Terrier, but he later becomes friends with him after he saves him from drowning in the canal.
Target's mascot, named "Bullseye", is a Bull Terrier.
Chico was Joker's pet dog in the film Next Friday.
Rocky Top's Sundance Kid Also known as Rufus. Rufus was a well known therapy dog that often visited children in the hospital. Won Best in Show at the Westminster Dog Show in 2006. The first colored Bull Terrier to do so.
Ken Greenhill's 1977 novel Hell Hound recounts the story of a  sociopathic Bull Terrier named Baxter, whose desire for a dominant master drives him to murder. The novel was adapted to the cult French horror film  Baxter in 1989.
The album cover for Working Class Dog by singer Rick Springfield is of his own pet Bull Terrier named Ronnie.
Famed hockey coach and commentator Don Cherry was given a Bull Terrier by Boston Bruins players in the 1970s, and has continually owned dogs with the same name ever since. Blue and her successors have become synonymous with Cherry, and have made frequent appearances on his merchandise and programming.
Cherry once owned a team in the Ontario Hockey League, the Mississauga IceDogs, now known as the Niagara IceDogs. Their mascot, Bones, is a Bull Terrier inspired by Blue.
Chris Van Allsburg, writer of books such as Jumanji and The Polar Express, includes a Bull Terrier named "Fritz" in each book he writes.
The mascot for Hiram College is a Bull Terrier.
"Grimm" from the syndicated comic strip Mother Goose and Grimm is a yellow, cartoon Bull Terrier.
A formerly abandoned deaf Bull Terrier named "Patsy Ann", from 1929-1942, would greet new ships coming into the harbor in Juneau, Alaska. She was dubbed the "Official Greeter of Juneau, Alaska" in 1934. A statue in Juneau was erected in her honor in 1992.
Nancy Drew has a pet Bull Terrier named Togo in the Nancy Drew mystery stories by Carolyn Keene.
The dog that chases Bart in the Simpsons episode "The Lastest Gun In The West" is a white bull terrier.
