
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===
Although the Giant Schnauzer is called 'Giant', this is not in comparison to other large dog breeds such as the Great Dane or the Rottweiler, but instead in comparison to the Standard and Miniature Schnauzers. The AKC breed standard calls for males to stand from 65 to 70 centimetres (25.5 to 27.5 in) at the withers, and for females to stand from 60 to 65 centimetres (23.5 to 25.5 in). Giant Schnauzers are square in shape, and should resemble a larger version of the Standard Schnauzer. The tail is long and the ears are small button ears carried high on the head. Where it is legal, it is possibly docked and the ears cropped.The head is 1/2 the length of the dog's back, when the back is measured from the withers to the base of the tail. The cheeks are flat, but well muscled. The coat is dense, wiry, and weather resistant. The fur on the Giant Schnauzer's face forms a distinct "beard" and eyebrows. Its stride is long and crisp.Giant Schnauzers come in two colors: solid black, and a pattern called pepper and salt, where banded hairs of black and white hairs cover the body, giving it the appearance of having been peppered and salted.


=== Temperament ===

Giant Schnauzers are usually a quiet breed. Due to its breeding, the Giant Schnauzer is inherently suspicious of strangers and can be very territorial. Once introduced, it is usually accepting of novel people or situations. It has the potential to be aggressive, but Giant Schnauzers are usually reserved - they are "amiable in repose, and a commanding figure when aroused"Giant Schnauzers have been described as trustworthy with children. They are very intelligent, and can become bored easily. They are also very energetic and highly spirited, which, when coupled with boredom, can lead to unwanted and destructive behavior. They are easily trained, and deeply loyal to their owner. Some breeders believe that pepper and salt colored Giant Schnauzers are more docile than their black-furred counterparts.
