
== The Kangal Shepherd Dog internationally ==

Britain's first Kangal Shepherd Dog litter was produced in 1967 by Gazi of Bakirtollo village and his mate Sabahat of Hayıroğlu village. Dogs from this original line formed the foundation of the so-called "Seacop" stock.In October 2012 The Kennel Club announced it will recognise the Kangal Shepherd Dog as a breed and classify it within the Pastoral Group. This will allow the breed to be exhibited at KC licensed events in the UK from July 2013. In December 2012 an interim Breed standard for the breed will be issued. The interim standard was issued in January 2013.In the US, the first purebred breeding programs for Kangal Shepherd Dogs began in the early 1980s. The Kangal Shepherd Dog is recognized by the United Kennel Club in the US, and by the national kennel clubs of South Africa and New Zealand. Many Kangal Shepherd Dogs are being bred in Germany as well, mostly by immigrant workers. Some are registered as Anatolians, that being the only registration option open to them in Germany; most are unregistered.
On January 1, 2012, the Australian National Kennel Club discontinued its recognition of the ANKC Kangal Dog as a separate breed to the Anatolian Shepherd Dog.On June 25th 2018, the FCI published the official Kangal Shepherd Dog breed standard to replace the previous Anatolian Shepherd Dog standard. 
In Namibia the dogs are being used to help protect livestock from cheetah attacks. Around 500 Kangal Shepherd Dogs have been given to farmers in Namibia since 1994 by the Cheetah Conservation Fund (CCF) and the scheme has proved so successful that it has been extended to Kenya. During the past 14 years the number of cheetahs killed by farmers is calculated to have fallen from 19 per farmer annually to 2.4. Livestock losses have been cut significantly at more than 80% of the farms where the dogs have been adopted. The great majority of cheetahs that are still killed by farmers are killed after specific attacks on livestock. Previously, the cats were tracked and killed whenever they neared a farm.
