
== History ==

The origins of the Drentsche Patrijshond are in the 16th century, from the Spioenen (or Spanjoelen) which came to the Netherlands through France from Spain, and is related to the Small Münsterländer of Germany and the Epagneul Français of France. In the Netherlands, these dogs were called partridge dogs. 
The presence of the partridge dogs had been visible for centuries, as in the 17th-century painting The Hunter's Present, c. 1658-60, by Gabriel Metsu. In the painting, the partridge dog leans against the hunter's knee, as the man is handing a woman a partridge, which was a double entendre at the time. The dog in The Hunter's Present is a very large, stocky dog that could possibly pull a cart; showing the range of the early type, a much smaller, lighter dog of the same type is shown in another painting by the same artist, The Poultry seller, 1662. This painting also involves a woman being offered a bird, regarded with suspicion by her dog.
Before formal recognition as a modern breed in 1943, the type had been kept separate from other dogs as an undocumented breed for centuries in the rural province of Drenthe. As the Drentsche Patrijshond is a breed developed in the Netherlands, the breed standard was first developed and approved in 1943 by the Raad van Beheer op Kynologisch Gebied (Dutch Kennel Club), the Fédération Cynologique Internationale national kennel club for the Netherlands. The Fédération Cynologique Internationale recognised the breed using the standard developed by the breed's country of origin as the standard to be used in international competition. The United Kennel Club in the United States also recognises the breed using the outdated (February 1994) Fédération Cynologique Internationale standard. 
In November 2010, the AKC recognized the Drentsche Patrijshond Club of North America (DPCNA) and the Drentsche Patrijshond was added to the AKC Foundation Stock Program, allowing owners of registered Drents to participate in AKC sanctioned events such as hunt tests and agility competitions, starting in 2011.
