
== History ==

The Wire Haired and Smooth Haired Pinschers, as the Standard Schnauzer and German Pinscher were originally called, were shown in dog books as early as 1884. However drawings of the German Pinscher date back to at least 1780, and the breed likely traces its roots to varieties of ratters well established on farms in Germany as far back as the 15th century. These medium-sized dogs descended from early European herding and guardian breeds.
The source of the German Pinscher can be traced back to 1836 when this breed surpassed the Mops in popularity. Pinschers were used as guardians for coaches. They also lived in homesteads where they were used to kill vermin, a job they did by instinct, as such behavior did not need to be trained into the breed. Even today you can observe German Pinschers searching for and finding rats in open areas and in homes. This high prey drive is a good reason not to leave a German Pinscher off lead outside of a fenced area.The Standard Schnauzer (then referred to as the Wire Haired Pinscher) was originally born in the same litter as the German Pincher. Over time, breeders decided to separate the "varieties," changing them to actual "breeds". After three generations of the same coat were born, the Pinscher-Schnauzer club allowed them to be registered as their respective "breed".
From 1950 to 1958, no litter had been registered. Credit is attributed to Werner Jung for collecting several of the breed in 1958 to continue the German Pinscher as we know the breed today.
The German Pinscher came to breeders in the United States in the early 1980s, though accounts of singular German Pinschers appearing in the country before then have been noted. In 1985, the German Pinscher Club of America was started by various German Pinscher fanciers, most of whom are no longer active in the breed. At this time, the German Pinscher was shown in rare breed shows. They were also recognized by the United Kennel Club. The German Pinscher gained full acceptance by the Canadian Kennel Club in 2000.
In 2004, the German Pinscher competed at its first Westminster Kennel Club. The Best of Breed winner was Ch. Windamir Hunter des Charmettes with the Best of Opposite Sex to Best of Breed won by Ch. Windamir's Chosen One.


=== Extinct varieties ===
There are several now-extinct varieties of the German Pinscher:
Schweizer Pinscher (also called the Jonataler Pinscher, Pfisterlinge, Silberpinsch, Swiss Salt and Pepper Pinscher, Swiss Shorthair Pinscher)
Seidenpinscher (also called the German Silky Pinscher, Silky Pinscher)Some of these may have recently been re-formed from the German Pinscher and marketed as rare breeds for those seeking unique pets.
