
== Genetic diseases ==
As with all purebred dogs, PWDs are vulnerable to certain genetic defects. Due to the limited gene pool for this breed, conscientious breeders carefully study pedigrees and select dogs to minimize the chance of genetic disease and improper coat. Unfortunately, like many breeds, growing popularity has encouraged breeding by people not knowledgeable about the breed.


=== Hip dysplasia ===
Like poodles, PWDs are vulnerable to hip dysplasia, a congenital and developmental problem with the hip joints. However, the risk of a PWD developing hip dysplasia can be greatly reduced by thoroughly checking the pedigrees and health clearances in both the sire and dam of the dog.


=== Cataracts, PRA, and distichiasis ===
Cataracts and progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) are two eye diseases found in PWDs. PRA, which causes "night blindness", may lead to complete blindness. Fortunately this is a simple recessive gene. DNA testing, known as "Optigen Testing", is now available which can identify a dog carrying the gene for PRA. A "normal" or "A" dog does not carry the gene for PRA. A "carrier" or "B" dog carries one copy of the PRA gene, and will not express the disease, but may pass the gene to offspring. An "affected" or "C" dog has two copies of the PRA version of the gene and will probably express the disease as late onset Progressive Retinal Atrophy. A "B" or "C" dog should be bred only to an "A" dog to ensure that any offspring will not express the disease.Ingrown eyelashes (distichiasis) occur in some curly-coated breeds, but they are not particularly common in PWDs. Ingrown eyelashes will rub the eye causing extensive corneal ulcerations. The condition is minor so long as it is not ignored, and can be surgically treated if necessary.


=== GM1 Storage Disease ===
GM1 Storage Disease, one of a family of conditions called GM1 gangliosidoses, is a recessive, genetic disorder that is inevitably fatal. It is caused by a deficiency of beta-galactosidase, with resulting abnormal storage of acidic lipid materials in cells of the central and peripheral nervous systems, but particularly in the nerve cells. Because PWDs are all rather closely related to one another and share a limited gene pool, PWDs who were GM1 Storage Disease carriers were able to be genetically identified, and the condition has now been almost entirely eliminated from the breed. All breeding stock should be tested for GM-1 storage disease or GM1 gangliosidoses, which is a fatal nerve disease that typically appears when a puppy is approximately six months of age. The affected puppy will show clinical signs of cerebellar dysfunction including ataxia, tremors, paresis, and seizures. The pet may also exhibit a change in temperament. Lesions of the retina and clouding of the cornea may occur.


=== Juvenile Dilated Cardiomyopathy ===

Juvenile Dilated Cardiomyopathy (JDCM) is a fatal condition caused by an autosomal recessive gene. Puppies affected with JDCM die suddenly or with very little warning usually between the ages of six weeks to seven months old. The signs and symptoms of JDCM include a 12 to 48 hour onset of loss of appetite, decreased energy level, vomiting, and difficulty breathing. Some pups have no physical signs or symptoms at all, may just collapse and die, or are found dead by the breeder or new owner. At this time, there is no known cure or treatment but there is a way to prevent producing JDCM affected puppies.Breeders now have a DNA gene based test, based on a cheek swab or a blood sample, which will determine if a dog is Normal (not carrying the gene) or is a Carrier of the JDCM gene. All breeding animals can be tested to determine their status, thus avoiding the breeding of two JDCM carriers and producing puppies which will die of this deadly disease.It is important that all prospective puppy buyers discuss Juvenile Dilated Cardiomyopathy with breeders. Ask if the parents have been tested for JDCM and what their status is, Normal or Carrier. A puppy from a JDCM DNA tested Normal sire or dam will not be affected with this fatal disease.
