
== History ==
The forebears of the Tenterfield Terrier accompanied Australia's first European settlers who sailed from Portsmouth in England's South. These dogs were vermin killers, and so the smallest of them were selected to play that role on ships, which is how they arrived in Australia. Large dogs may would not have fared as well in the cramped shipboard environment, where vermin find nooks and crannies. Thus small terriers had an advantage. Miniature individuals of the Fox Terrier breed suited the role, as their original breeding matched the new task closely.
By the late 19th century a dog type known as the Miniature Fox Terrier (known colloquially as "Mini Foxies") was well established in rural Australia as a vermin killer and family companion. By the 1920s the dog was a fixture in urban households.The name "Tenterfield" does not denote the terrier’s place of origin as Tenterfield, New South Wales. Rather, the name derives from there. The dog was bred extensively in and around northern New South Wales. Tenterfield is one of many localities in Australia in which small terriers of this type were kept. The town of Tenterfield is significant in Australian history for the Tenterfield Oration on independence from Britain. Additionally, the owner of the town's saddlery a man named George Woolnough, was immortalized by his grandson entertainer Peter Allen as the "Tenterfield Saddler".  Tenterfield residents attest that Mr. Woolnough  owned and loved a number of these terriers, though unfortunately no photographs of his dogs are known.
Accordingly, the name Tenterfield Terrier was suggested in the 1990s by television gardening personality Don Burke,.


=== Breed development ===
In 1991 a group of enthusiasts from the state of South Australia formed the autonomous Miniature Fox Terrier Club of South Australia, separate to the Miniature Fox Terrier Club of Australia, which had been operating for some time. In 1992 they met with owners from other states to discuss the future of the Clubs. At that time, it became evident that there were differences as to the preferred type of dog that would represent the Miniature Fox Terrier breed. Further, challenges to the name “Miniature Fox Terrier” were being mounted, and threatened to preclude recognition by the ANKC which was a priority among some breeders. The establishment of the Tenterfield Terrier Club of Australia Inc took place in January 1993, by approximately 85% of votes returned to the ANKC by fanciers across NSW WA and SA. In 2002, the Tenterfield Terrier was recognized by the ANKC and placed in Group 2, Terriers.
The Tenterfield Terrier breed standard differs from that of the Miniature Fox Terrier, and although they are sometimes confused, the two breeds have been developing along divergent lines for some time and are now separate breeds.
