
== Classification ==

According to the most universally accepted cynological classification (FCI Spitz and Primitive Types Group), the breed belongs to the Primitive Group of dogs. The Alopekis has erect ears, a wedge-shaped head, normal (scissors) bite and dentition and a mesomorphic, normal-symmetrical structure, body type and morphology. Typical specimens do not display elements of dwarfism. Their bodies are strong and their legs are neither bowed nor notably or disproportionately shortened. Acquired leg deformities are also undesirable characteristics. The breed's proportions suggest a gradual reduction in size over time (genetic sweep) due to evolution, selection and local adaptation. It is also possible that the breed shares some ancestry, together with the Cretan Hound, from the smaller and more slender Ethiopian Wolf (Canis simensis) and perhaps even the Southern sub-species Canis simensis citernii, rather than the larger and heavier Grey wolf (Canis lupus) ancestral species. Alopekis morphology suggests a natural – archaic dog type, ancestral / archetypical to the subsequent central European small Spitz/ Nordic and Terrier breeds. The Pomeranian dog, said to be a descendant of ancient Dalmatian / Illyrian dogs and especially those from the island of Melite / Melita (Mljet) in the Adriatic Sea, which used to be a Greek territory until the 12th century, is probably a descendant of the Alopekis and the Meliteo Kynidio / Small Greek Domestic Dog. Additionally, the hunting ability of the Alopekis, is a further indication that suggests a relation to other breeds of this group [Group V of the F.C.I. Classification that were developed in other Mediterranean regions after the Greek colonization in Southern Italy, Sicily, Malta, Cyrene, Corsica, Southern France, the Iberian Peninsula and the Balearic islands, probably with the influence of larger hounds such as the Cretan Hound, as suggested by the existence in Crete of a small type similar to the Alopekis, in morphology and use, as a hunting and utility dog, which in modern times is called Venetaki (possibly from the Latin venaticus = hunting as Crete was under Venetian occupation from 1212 to 1669); in ancient times this dog was possibly identical to the type called  Κυναμολγός (Gr. Kynamolgos, cynomolgus = milking dog).
