
== Health ==


=== Hereditary concerns ===

Irish Red and White Setters are generally a healthy breed. However, there are three known diseases in the breed which are monitored by the breed clubs.These are:

Canine Leucocyte Adhesion Deficiency (CLAD) – a failure of the immune system to fight infection. Young puppies do not thrive and continually pick up infections. They can also have growth problems and may die well before they reach their first birthday. The Kennel Club has only registered Irish Red and White Setters that are proven clear of the CLAD mutation, either by direct DNA testing or by virtue of having parents that are proven to be clear of the CLAD mutation (i.e. hereditarily clear). No carriers can be registered. This ruling came into effect on 17 June 2008;
von Willebrands Disease (vWD) – a failure of the blood to clot over a wound, which in extreme cases, the dog can bleed to death with only a small wound, if unattended. The Kennel Club will only register litters of Irish Red and White Setters if both parents are DNA tested clear of the von Willebrand Disease (vWD) mutation, or are hereditarily clear of this mutation. This ruling came into effect on 1 January 2011;
and Posterior Polar Cataract (PPC) – sight is impaired by a cataract on the back of the lens of the eye.Because of breeders' proactive approach, in the UK the number of affected dogs have been kept low and CLAD and vWD are "virtually unheard of in the breed today".In 2004, the UK Kennel Club established the Accredited Breeders Scheme, which was later called the Assured Breeders scheme (ABS). The scheme received UKAS accreditation in April 2013. ABS members are required to adhere to additional criteria than those necessary for basic KC registration. Among the extra requirements is "Ensuring that the parents of each litter are readily identifiable by either Microchip, Tattoo or DNA profile." As at March 2013, breeders of Irish Red and White Setters who are members of the ABS must continue to use screening systems for eye testings and DNA checks for vWD and CLAD. It also advises screening for hip dysplasia.Irish Red and White Setters have an average lifespan of 10 to 12 years.


=== Outcross programme ===

In an attempt to address the possibility of a very restricted gene pool, the Irish Kennel Club (IKC) announced in 2011 that it was to instigate a programme of allowing Irish Red and White Setters to be crossed with Irish Setters. Any such outcross matings were to be carefully monitored. The programme was supported by the Irish Red and White Setter Club of Ireland, the Irish Red Setter Club (Ireland) and other national Kennel Clubs. The IKC felt there was a high degree of inbreeding within ten generations of Irish Red and White setters and wished to increase the genetic diversity of the breed to prevent genetic problems arising from close inbreeding. It considered that the genes of the working lines of Irish Setters were very similar to those of the Irish Red and White setters and their close ancestry had already been used to aid the revival of the Irish Red and White setter. Before any outcross matings could take place, the mating would have to be approved by the official Outcross Committee. Only dogs with current health tests would be considered.However, the programme was met with dismay by many other breed clubs worldwide who felt it was a flawed and disappointing decision. An official of the Canadian breed club said: "we cannot condone the crossbreeding of our essentially healthy IRWS breed with dogs of a breed which is known to hold, by various unknown modes of inheritance, far more genetic detritus than ours." The Irish Red and White Setter Club of GB felt the outcross was not desirable nor necessary. Despite such criticism, some breed clubs have chosen to take part in the programme.
