
== Origin ==
Šarplaninac is a breed of Antiquity, believed by many to be one of, if not the oldest true Molosser in the World. The Šarplaninac is a close relative of all Balkan dogs, from Slovenia to Greece, as well as the Caucasian, Turkish and Central Asian sheepdogs. It is the Balkans where Molossers come from, having spread on all sides of the world thousands of years ago, influencing the establishment of most modern mastiff and shepherd dog breeds, leading some to conclude that the Šarplaninec is the oldest dog of this type.This breed is most commonly associated with the Šar Mountains region which is how it got its name. However, the Šara is only a single mountain in the Balkans, while the dogs classified as Šarplaninci can be found in many other regions of Macedonia and Serbia, such as the mountains of Korab, Stogovo, Bistra, Jablanica, Pelister and elsewhere, lending credence to the claims that even the popular and currently official name is rather misleading and not completely respectful. Many believe that this had been the famous palace dog of Alexander the Great, while the Skilos tou Alexandrou was one of his war dogs, but chances are that it was a specific mild-mannered type of the Šarplaninac known as Zlatan that served as the great conqueror's pet, seeing how all but one variety of the breed have traditionally been very dominant and ferocious workers.Prior to the Turkish conquest of the area, all of the shepherd dogs of the Balkans were known under the  name of "Illyrian Mountain Dog", distinguishable as regional Molosser types, rather than actual breeds. However, these great dogs existed in the Balkans long before the Illyrian connection, so even that name is technically incorrect and would be more accurate if applied strictly to the Bosnian dogs and not to the Šarplaninac anyway. The livestock guardian breeds of Bulgaria, Albania, Serbia, Greece, Romania and other Balkan countries are a result of the strict breeding separations enforced by the native peoples of the area, but they all have the same ancestral roots as the original Alaunt and Epirian Mastiff, sharing their origin with the ancient dogs of Armenia and other Caucasian territories, as well as with the great wolfhounds of Central Asia, although the Šarplaninec of Macedonia had been bred in isolation longer than most of its relatives.The breed was officially recognized in 1939 and registered as the Illyrian Sheepdog, a name it had to share with its smaller north-Istrian cousin, the Kraševac, Karst Shepherd. In 1954, these two varieties were separated and the Šarplaninac officially became the Yugoslav Shepherd Dog, even though matings between the Slovenian breed and the Šarplaninec continued to occur. There are many other names in use, but presently the Šarplaninac is known as the Srpsko-Makedonski Ovčarski Pas. The Šarplaninac was recognized by the United Kennel Club in 1995 and is becoming a valued livestock guardian breed in the United States and Canada, where it is used for predator control and protecting large estates.
