
== Structure and facilities ==

Glanford Park is a relatively simple affair, consisting of four single-tier stands of equal height, three of which are all seated. Although there is no seating in any of the four corners between stands the ground is still fully enclosed, with the rear wall and roof of each stand simply being extended to meet in the corners. Since February 2011, the south-west corner of the ground has been completely filled-in with the construction of the ‘Legends Lounge’, with the other three simply containing refreshment kiosks.


=== SPB Stand ===

The SPB stand (formerly the Scunthorpe Telegraph Stand) is the West side stand, and is the ground's main stand. It runs along the entire length of the pitch and is fully seated.
The two southernmost blocks of seating are marketed as the club's family area. To the rear of the stand are the club’s various executive suites. These include a restaurant which is open throughout the week, a set of executive boxes, the Sir Ian Botham Executive Lounge and the Legends Lounge, which occupies the south-west corner. Members of the media are allocated a small area of seating at the rear of the stand, and a television gantry is also positioned within the roof space.
The players’ tunnel is located centrally within this stand, with the team dugouts being located on either side of the opening. The dressing rooms are naturally all located within this stand.
Other facilities located within this stand include the club’s main offices, ticket office, club shop and sports injury clinic.


=== Britcon Stand ===

The name of this stand is the most frequently changing. It is much more commonly known as the "Doncaster Road End" among supporters, or even simpler, the "Donny Road End" or “DRE”. This stand is the only terraced stand at Glanford Park, and typically houses the more vocal supporters.
The club’s popular bar, ‘The Iron Bar’ is located below this stand and is open on match days prior to kick-off and during half-time.
The Britcon Stand was due to be fitted with seating after the 2010–11 season due to Football League regulations that all standing areas must be made seating following three seasons in the Championship, however Scunthorpe United were subsequently relegated, reprieving the terrace for the time being.


=== Clugston Stand ===
The Clugston Stand (formerly the Grove Wharf Stand prior to the start of the 2012-13 season) is the East stand of the ground, and houses seated home supporters. Disabled seating is available at the front of  the stand in four allocated bays. The Clugston Stand now also features a can bar and a food outlet in the void beneath the seating, which along with additional toilet facilities was installed at a cost of £100,000 in 2006.
The stadium’s match day control room is located at the rear of this stand.


=== AMS Stand ===
The AMS Stand (also known as the South Stand or “Railway End”) houses away supporters, with a maximum capacity of 1,678. Extra away seating can be made available for away fans if required by sectioning off the corner of the Clugston Stand closest to the AMS Stand, however this is only usually done for games such as local derbies. A bar for visiting fans is positioned below this stand.
The AMS Stand was originally a terrace much the same as the Britcon Stand when the stadium was first built, however it was later decided that in the interests of safety that this end should be converted to seating only. This conversion was made during 1991, with the original blue seats being sourced from Aston Villa F.C. as a part of a deal involving the sale of defender Neil Cox to the West Midlands club. These seats were replaced with newer claret-coloured seats prior to the 2007–08 season.
