
== History ==

Southport F.C. moved to what is now called Haig Avenue in 1905 (then called Ash Lane). The road the ground is situated on and the ground itself were officially renamed Haig Avenue after Earl Haig in 1921.The grandstand that now stands at Haig Avenue was opened in August 1968, 2 years after the original main stand had burnt down. The wooden structure, which had been purchased from the Southport Flower Show burnt down the day after a game against Wrexham on Boxing Day in 1966 (a game which Southport won 1-0).  Most of the clubs possessions including kits, went up in flames with only the club safe (holding the previous day's takings) surviving. A temporary main stand was put up instead during the season Billy Bingham's side won promotion to the third division. Eric Morecambe presented the club with a trophy to commemorate their achievement.In 1973, following his first Grand National victory, Red Rum was presented to the crowd at half time during a match against Lincoln City.
Today there is open terracing at the 'Blowick' away end and on the 'Popular' side opposite the Main Stand. Covered terracing for about 10,000 spectators on the Popular side and Scarisbrick end was demolished following legal action against the football club by Sefton Council under the Safety of Sports Grounds legislation.
However, on 10 September 2012, it was announced that Merseyrail had agreed a sponsorship deal that would see Haig Avenue renamed the "Merseyrail Community Stadium".

After years of procrastination, the club said that in the summer of 2014, with the financial assistance of 'Trust in Yellow' (the Supporters' Trust), County Insurance and a grant from the football authorities, it would erect new corner floodlights to replace those erected along the sides of the pitch over 40 years ago. While some preparatory work on the project started in May/June 2014, just within the deadline set in the town planning conditions, the club has since revised the completion date to November 2014.
Everton Reserves currently play their home games at the stadium.
