
== Structures and facilities ==
Loftus Road has a capacity of 18,439.  The four stands are the Loftus Road End (often shortened to The Loft), Ellerslie Road Stand, South Africa Road Stand and the School End, the Upper Tier of which is used by away supporters who are allocated the lower tier only for cup matches.
Because of the size of the stadium, supporters find themselves close to the pitch compared to other stadiums. All four of the modern stands meet with no gaps, giving an overall impression of a tightly enclosed stadium. The upper tier of the School End is the stand reserved for away supporters, and all the stands have two tiers with the exception of the Ellerslie Road Stand.The South Africa Road stand is the biggest of the four stands at the stadium. It is a two tier stand which includes The Paddocks and contains a row of executive boxes separating The Paddocks and the upper tier. It also houses the dugouts, changing rooms, suites, tunnel, offices, club shop, box office and press conference rooms. The Paddocks area is the cheapest in the ground, whereas the upper tier is the most expensive. The new exclusive W12 and C Clubs are located here.

The Loft is a two tier stand built in 1981 behind the goal and traditionally where most members and season ticket holders sit. This is the third most expensive stand to sit in. QPR generally opt to attack this end in the second half because it is believed to be good luck. The police crowd observation box is located in this stand and it is home to the members' bar in the ground, The Blue and White Bar. A new colour scoreboard is located at this end, installed in Summer 2008, on the advertising boards between the upper and lower tiers.
The Ellerslie Road stand, rebuilt in 1972, is constantly renamed and sponsored, but QPR fans refer to it as the Ellerslie Road Stand. It is a single tiered stand and is the smallest in height, but not in noise and capacity. It is also the only stand not to be painted in blue and white hoops, instead it has "QPR" painted across it. It is home to the famous "R Block" where, along with the Loft's Q and P blocks sit QPR's partisan following. Most of the noise is generated from this stand, in addition to the Loft. This stand is a favourite of some fans because of the view and atmosphere. This is the second most expensive stand. It is also home to the commentary and television camera gantry.
At the west end of the stadium is the School End which has been all seated since 1990 after the Taylor Report. The Upper Tier Has 1,700 seats which are allocated to away supporters for league matches. The Lower Tier is where the home supporters are located. The away supporters will also get the Lower Tier for FA Cup fixtures and League Cup fixtures to meet requirements.
