
== Redevelopment ==

There were plans in the late 1990s for a move to a new 20,000 seater stadium on adjoining waste ground, but these were scrapped.
On 15 February 2006, the club unveiled plans for the redevelopment of their current ground.  The plans would see every stand other than the Rochdale Road End being redeveloped.  When completed it would initially be a 16,000 seater stadium, estimated to cost £80 million, and with a working name of the "Oldham Arena".On 14 November 2007, Oldham Athletic received planning permission for the Broadway Stand, whilst Oldham Borough Council rejected the further development of the stadium due to local objections regarding the height and size of a proposed block of flats.  On 12 December 2007, after amending the plans, another council meeting gave permission for redevelopment.  Facilities would include conferencing and a hotel plus the option of a casino.Demolition of the Broadway Stand started on 8 May 2008, with the work completed before the start of the new season.  The building of the new stand was due to commence in December 2008 and was expected to take 16 months.On 5 September 2008, Simon Blitz told podcast World Soccer Daily that although Oldham still planned to continue the development of Boundary Park and surrounding areas, the plans were on hold for now because of the financial crisis of 2007–2010 and the subsequent downturn in the UK property market.
Because of these problems, the club announced in the summer of 2009 that it was considering moving to a new stadium in Failsworth.  This caused some controversy amongst supporters as despite Failsworth being officially part of the borough, it has a Manchester postcode.  It is also only three miles from the City of Manchester Stadium and only one mile from the proposed new stadium of F.C. United of Manchester in Moston, Manchester.  If all went to according to plan, the new stadium was anticipated to be ready for the beginning of the 2011–12 season.
After being led to believe by Oldham Council that the Failsworth site was a deliverable option, the club were extremely disappointed to hear that the Charities Commission had turned down their application.  Oldham Athletic had wasted millions of pounds on drawing up plans, purchasing land and legal fees - and stated that 'confidence in the current council's ability to deliver any proposal for a new stadium is at zero.' On 28 July 2011 the council offered the club £5.7 million to help with their redevelopment fund of Boundary Park, which would involve the redevelopment of the Broadway Stand.Oldham Council confirmed planning approval for the new North Stand in April 2013, including a 2,671 capacity stand, a health and fitness suite, supporters' bar and event facilities.  Demolition and preparatory work started in the summer of 2013.
Construction of the new North Stand is still ongoing, although the seating area in the stand was open for use on 17 October 2015 for the home match against Sheffield United.  The new North Stand is significantly taller than the stand that it replaced although the capacity for supporters is roughly the same.  The additional height allows for office space, corporate hospitality, retail opportunities and a gymnasium.
