
== Description ==
Fratton Park is built in a traditional English style with four separate stands arranged closely around the four sides of the football pitch. The pitch measures 115 x 73 yards, and is aligned from east to west, which is considered unusual in English football, as most other pitches are orientated north to south.
The four stands are named The Fratton End (west), The North Stand (north), The Milton End (east) and The South Stand (south). Before the reconstruction of the 4,500 seat Fratton End in 1997, the previous terraced stands of the old Fratton End, Lower North Terrace and Milton End were all connected, forming a broken C-shaped terraced bowl for much of Fratton Park's earlier history.
Fratton Park today has a current (reduced) capacity for 19,669 supporters, although the stadium has had a much larger maximum capacity for 58,000 supporters after the construction of the North Stand in 1935. Fratton Park's record attendance is 51,385, reached in an FA Cup quarter-final match vs Derby County, on 26 February 1949, in which Portsmouth won 2-1.
At the western end of Fratton Park is the single tier 4,500 seat Fratton End, which first opened on 31 October 1997 and is the newest and tallest stand in Fratton Park. The Fratton End also had an official opening ceremony on 4 April 1998, timed to coincide with a home match that was one day before the centennial anniversary of Portsmouth F.C. on 5 April 1998.  The current Fratton End replaced an earlier two-tier Fratton End built in 1956, which had its upper tier demolished in 1986 for structural reasons. The remaining lower tier of the Fratton End was demolished eleven seasons later in 1997 to clear the land for the building of the current Fratton End stand in 1997.
Along the northern side of the pitch is the two-tier North Stand, the largest stand in Fratton Park. The North Stand (and Lower North Terrace) was rebuilt and reopened on 7 September 1935 and replaced an earlier smaller structure. A new roof extension was added to the North Stand upper tier roof in 1997 and extends out over the lower tier (previously uncovered) supported by steel columns to the pitch touchline.
At the eastern end of Fratton Park is the Milton End, the smallest stand. In 1928, it was rebuilt to its current size. Infamously, the Milton End was the only roofless stand in the Premier League, before a roof was added before the 2007-08 season. The Milton End is used by visiting 'away' supporters and is accessed from a narrow back alleyway named Specks Lane.
The South Stand has two tiers and was opened on 29 August 1925 and is currently the oldest stand in Fratton Park. It replaced an earlier and smaller South Stand (known as The Grand Stand) that existed on the site between 1899-1925.  The current 1925 South Stand was designed by the famed Scottish architect Archibald Leitch. The entrance to the South Stand is in Frogmore Road and is notable for its mock Tudor façade, which is a remnant of a grand mock Tudor pavilion structure - with a clock tower - that previously occupied the site from 1905 before the current South Stand was built in 1925.
The football ground is served by Fratton railway station one mile to the west (about 10 minutes' walk away), which is located on the Portsmouth Direct Line. Fratton Park's naming was influenced by the close walking distance to Fratton railway station which offered good transport links, which were key to attracting new supporter interest in its early history.
Despite its name, Fratton Park is not located in the Fratton area of Portsmouth - as it was built on a former nineteenth century Milton Farm potato field within the Milton district of present-day Portsmouth.  Fratton Park also retains a PO4 8RA Milton postcode and not the PO1 area postcode of the neighbouring Fratton area and Portsmouth city centre.
