
== The future ==
As parts of Blundell Park are old, the cost of maintaining the stadium, particularly the wooden sections, is expensive. Compared to many football grounds, there is a serious lack of corporate facilities and amenities for visiting supporters; bars and food outlets within the stadium are usually crowded and unable to realise their potential income. Blundell Park is rarely used for anything other than football, whereas many clubs with more modern stadia are able to let out the ground for concerts, corporate events and other sports such as rugby. Further complications arise from the location of the stadium among terraced houses and next to the bank of the River Humber (separated by a railway line) which makes redeveloping Blundell Park to accommodate the 20,000 supporters required for promotion to the Premier League prohibitively expensive. Parking is largely limited to the streets of terraced houses surrounding the stadium. There is no secure parking at Blundell Park and no additional provision for public transport such as park and ride. Blundell Park is also the lowest football stadium in the United Kingdom, at a height of only 2 feet above sea-level. While not in immediate danger from rising tides, it is prudent for Grimsby Town to pursue a move to higher ground.Since the mid-1990s the club has been pursuing a movement to a new ground on the western outskirts of Grimsby at Great Coates, adjacent to the A180 dual carriageway. Planning permission has been granted for the provisionally titled Conoco Stadium, but opposition by some residents combined with the economic crisis have seen the project continually delayed. The financing of the new stadium would come primarily from the sale of the land at Blundell Park and from retail development on the land surrounding the new stadium as well as substantially increased revenue from the new stadium itself.
Grimsby Town are now looking at an alternative site at Peaks Parkway which is located two miles South of Grimsby (and around 2.5 miles due West of Blundell Park), after the proposal to build a new stadium at Great Coates fell through. The Club are looking at building a 14,000 capacity stadium along with an adjoining retail development. North East Lincolnshire Council which owns the land has granted the Club 12 months to come up with detailed plans as to the how area could be redeveloped. It won't probably known until sometime in 2015 whether the proposed scheme will be feasible.
