
== Structure and facilities ==
The pitch at Turf Moor is surrounded by four stands, known as the Bob Lord Stand, the David Fishwick Stand, the James Hargreaves Stand and the Jimmy McIlroy stand. The stadium has a total capacity of 21,401 (21,940 seats), which is approximately one seat for every three inhabitants of the town, no other league team has such a high ratio. The two newest stands, the James Hargreaves Stand and the Jimmy McIlroy Stand, both have two tiers, while the Bob Lord and David Fishwick are both single-tiered. The Bob Lord Stand and the David Fishwick Stand both have wooden seats. All four stands are entirely seated. Visiting supporters are seated in the Cricket Field Stand.

The largest stand at Turf Moor is the James Hargreaves Stand, which was opened in 1996 as part of a ground redevelopment project which saw two new stands built to replace the Longside and the Bee Hole End at a total cost of £5.3 million. When built it was named the North Stand, although it has its current name thanks to a six-figure sponsorship deal. The stand can accommodate 8,704 spectators (including 192 corporate seats) and was opened on 23 April 1996, replacing the Longside terrace. It runs parallel to the length of the pitch. The television gantry is located in the James Hargreaves Stand along with the media area, which is situated at the rear of the upper tier. The stand is the traditional seating area of the Suicide Squad, who had previously stood in the Longside until the terrace was demolished in 1995. In the space between the upper and lower tiers of the James Hargreaves Stand there is a corporate area, which apart from being used for matchday hospitality is used for functions and events. Both the suite and the home dressing room, is licensed to hold civil marriage services.

The Jimmy McIlroy Stand is situated at the eastern side of the pitch and has a current capacity of 6,088. The upper tier of the stand is the designated family area at Turf Moor and like the James Hargreaves Stand, it has a number of corporate hospitality boxes. The Bob Lord Stand, which has a capacity of 3,147 fans, runs parallel with Harry Potts Way and houses the executive lounges as well as the Burnley Football Club trophy room. The stand was built in 1974 and was paid for in part by the sale of Martin Dobson to Everton. Named after Bob Lord, the former chairman of Burnley, the stand cost £480,000 was opened by Edward Heath, the Conservative Party leader at the time, a Burnley supporter, who had just been defeated as prime minister by Labour's Harold Wilson.The Cricket Field Stand, also known as the David Fishwick Stand for sponsorship reasons, is the oldest current stand at Turf Moor. It was constructed in 1969 and backs onto the clubhouse and pavilion of Burnley Cricket Club. It contains both teams' dressing rooms as well as the officials' lounge. Turf Moor is one of the few remaining football grounds in England to have the changing facilities behind the goals. The stand was made available to home supporters for Burnley's first Premier League season in 2009–10, having previously been the away section of the stadium. This was repeated again during the early part of the 2015–16 season and, following work within the concourse and on the stand the permanently segregate fans, this split was made permanent.  The current stand capacity is 4,112, with 2,430 away seats allocated and 1,682 home seats.In the corner of the ground between the James Hargreaves Stand and Jimmy McIlroy Stand there is a 36m² Barco video wall, which was previously situated in the Cricket Field Stand between 2007 and 2009.  In the car park behind the James Hargreaves Stand is Stadium Fitness, which includes a gymnasium, table-tennis facilities and a large sports hall. Outside the ground, between the Jimmy McIlroy and Bob Lord stands is the Burnley club shop, otherwise known as the Clarets Superstore. Following development work in 2016, some of the club's offices were relocated to a new level above the store.
