
== History ==
The stadium was built and opened in the early 1890s, consisting of a single wooden stand with a capacity of just 250, this was replaced in 1923 with a 650 seater. It was owned by the city council and taken over by 'The Posh' following their formation in 1934. The council built brick dressing rooms and a committee room at the back of the wooden stand to support the club. These survived until the 1950s, when the North Stand was constructed.The two goal ends were the next to be built. Many home fans had traditionally stood at the London Road End, so a covered standing terrace was constructed there just before the Second World War. A similar structure was built at the Moy's End at around the same time.Financial difficulties during the war years meant that the ground lease was very nearly terminated by the city council. Another local sports club almost took a 10-year lease, but 'The Posh' were saved in 1942 by two individuals who paid the £50 owed in rent by the club.In the 1950s, the council sold London Road to the club following a long term lease and it was at this time that major development of the ground began. In 1953, the Moy's End was refurbished with new covered terracing and a similar improvement was made at the London Road End just over a year later. A new stand, with 2,404 seats and standing room in the front, was constructed behind the old wooden stand in 1956 and opened in time for the 1957–58 season. The wooden stand was demolished, leaving a gap of 30 yards between the new Main (North) Stand and the pitch (the pitch was moved back the following season).A new standing terrace was then built at the Glebe Road (southern) side of the stadium shortly after the completion of the Main Stand. Four executive boxes, along with a television platform, would later be added to the structure. Floodlights were added to the stadium in 1960, with four pylons erected at each corner of the ground. Joe Richards, who was then chairman of the Football League, performed the switch-on ceremony. The first match in which the floodlights were used was against Arsenal in February 1960.Following the club's promotion to the First Division in 1992, the Main Stand was forced to undergo re-development. This was because the stadium's seated capacity was below the level required by the Taylor Report. To solve this problem, the stand's terraces were converted to seats. 700 of these new seats were bought second hand from Leicester City, who had no use for them following the re-development of their Filbert Street stadium. Another 300 seats were taken from Millwall's stadium, The Den. Millwall were about to move into a new stadium themselves. With a capacity of 3,605, the Main Stand's facilities were improved to include a pub, conference areas and a retail shop.Due to increased support, a new stand was constructed on the Glebe Road side of the ground. The two-tiered South Stand, with a capacity of 5,000, opened in time for the end of the 1995–96 season. The Football Trust contributed roughly £900,000 to the project. The stand was initially sponsored by Freemans and then by Thomas Cook. It is now called the Norwich and Peterborough Family Stand, due to a deal with the Norwich and Peterborough Building Society.The new millennium saw the London Road End and Moy's End fitted with new roofs and crush barriers to comply with safety requirements. The pitch received a large make-over in 2001, when the entire playing surface was removed to insert 2 km of new drainage pipes.In 2014 the Norwegian company ABAX UK (electronic triplogs, GPS positioning) signed a 5-year sponsorship with Peterborough FC and gave London Road the new name ABAX Stadium
