
== Current stands ==


=== Arkell's Stand ===

Located on the north side of pitch. The majority of this stand was constructed in 1971, with extra seating being added near the pitch-side in late 1992. At either end of the stand are large windshields, and there are two roof-supporting beams within the stand. It contains an executive seating area, VIP lounge, the players' dressing rooms and a tunnel out onto the pitch. It is named after Thomas Arkell of Arkell's Brewery, who funded the original Arkell's stand. The west corner of this stand is allocated to away fans. 1,200 of the total 3,300 away allocation is here. This stand has undergone a facelift, with multiple-coloured seats replaced with red or white seats to give the stand a cleaner, more up-to-date look.
It also is home to the two new dugouts which were built during the facelift. The stand will be thoroughly refurbished during County Ground's future developments
It has a capacity of roughly 5,800.


=== Stratton Bank ===

This is at the east end of the pitch. It is a former terrace, now with seats bolted on, and has no roof. Although planning permission was granted to build a roof on the stand, due to the club's financial plight at the time the necessary funds were not available. The Stratton Bank stand makes up the remaining 2,200 of the away allocation, but is only really needed for big games (local derbies, big league, or cup games) or for larger clubs with big away support. The 1,200 in the Arkell's Stand is usually more than adequate. The stadium scoreboard is located at the back of this stand. A notable feature is a large Rolex clock adjacent to the scoreboard which is owned by Deacon's Jewellers, the only one in the world 
as part of a football stadium.
On 28 February 2009 for Swindon Town's 40th anniversary of winning the league cup in 1969 it announced it would be holding a competition to rename Stratton Bank to whatever the winner chose for the 2009/10 and 2010/11 seasons. The winner, the Adkins Family Stand, was announced on Sky TV's Soccer A.M. show on 2 May 2009 with the draw being done by then-Swindon Town chairman Andrew Fitton.


=== Don Rogers Stand ===

This stand, on the south of the pitch was built in 1994 as the Intel Stand.  It then was sponsored by the Nationwide Building Society until the end of the 2006/07 season, and then it was sponsored by the Kingswood Group until March 2008. It is sometimes referred to as the South Stand by supporters. It features a cantilevered roof, which means there are no roof supports obstructing the view of the game. It replaced an old two-tier stand, of which the upper tier had become unusable due to structural problems.
There is a second concourse inside the stand which can be opened and used as a second executive area to the ground. If some seats were removed, this would allow the club to use this concourse to add executive boxes to the County Ground.
It is understood this concourse has never been opened due to the lack of funds Swindon Town have had over the last 10 years.
On 14 April 2008, Chief Executive Nick Watkins told a fans' forum that the club was then considering opening up the second concourse to add executive boxes to the ground, and, in 2011, when plans for redeveloping a new County Ground coalesced, this was confirmed.
From the start of the 2007/08 season, the stand was renamed as the Don Rogers Stand.
It currently has a capacity of around 4,800.


=== Town End ===

At the west end of the pitch, this stand is named for its being closest to the town centre. Since the mid-2000s it has become popular with the more vocal fans, and therefore has what is considered to be the best atmosphere in the stadium on a match day. One factor is the lower ticket prices for this end and Swindon Town offering the same prices on match day as in advance.
The south end of this stand is notable because the floodlight located there pierces the stand's roof and is integrated into the stand. The Town End is sponsored by Fast Plant as of October 2010. The sponsorship was first seen during Swindon Town's derby match against Bristol Rovers on 9 October 2010, which Town won 2-1.
The Town End holds approximately 2,000.
