
== Future: Stamford Bridge Redevelopment Project ==
Under Roman Abramovich's control, the club has announced that it wants to develop Stamford Bridge to around 55,000 to 60,000 seats. However, its location in a heavily built-up part of Inner London, in between a main road and two railway lines, makes this difficult. The dispersal of an additional 13,000 to 15,000 fans into the residential roads of the Moore Park Estate & areas surrounding Stamford Bridge would undoubtedly create congestion.


=== Exploration of alternative sites ===
Alternative possibilities include moving from Stamford Bridge to a location such as the Earls Court Exhibition Centre, White City, Battersea Power Station, the Imperial Road Gasworks (off the Kings Road on the Fulham and Chelsea border) and the Chelsea Barracks. But, under the Chelsea Pitch Owners articles of association, the club would relinquish the name 'Chelsea Football Club' should it ever move from Stamford Bridge. On 3 October 2011, the club issued a statement, in which it proposed to buy back the freehold from Chelsea Pitch Owners Plc.  This has been widely speculated as the first move by the football club to begin their movement away from the current stadium. On 27 October 2011, Chelsea F.C. failed in its bid to buy back the freehold, with shareholders of the CPO voting against selling the land.
On 4 May 2012, Chelsea F.C. announced a bid to purchase Battersea Power Station, as part of plans to build a new 60,000-seater stadium on the site. Though they were not the preferred bidders, they released artistic impressions of the proposed stadium at the BPS on 22 June 2012.
On 17 June 2014, club owner Roman Abramovich released a statement, saying that he had commissioned a study of the area from Fulham Broadway to Stamford Bridge and beyond by West London-based architects Lifschutz Davidson Sandilands. The study was commissioned to see if there are any ways Chelsea could expand Stamford Bridge. 


=== Current Plans ===
Chelsea now have plans to expand the stadium to 60,000 from 41,798, which would take it up to the second-biggest stadium in London and the third-biggest stadium in the Premier League. It would also make it the ninth-biggest stadium in the UK by capacity. 


=== Planning Permission ===
It was announced on 5 January 2017 that the planners at Hammersmith and Fulham council had approved the redevelopment of the stadium. The whole of Chelsea village will be demolished and the new stadium will include a new club shop, museum, a bar and restaurant. The two existing hotels, restaurants, bars and spa will be relocated.
On 6 March 2017 full permission was given to redevelop Stamford Bridge by the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, who said the "high quality and spectacular design" would add to the capital's "fantastic array of sporting arenas".


=== Playing away from Stamford Bridge ===
As part of the Redevelopment of the stadium it was determined that the club would have to find an alternative site to play home games for the duration of the construction of the stadium. It was reported that the length of time could vary between 3-4 years. The club has said they will keep their supporters informed as the study progresses. On 28 September 2014 it was revealed that Chelsea had enquired about a temporary move to Twickenham Stadium to help facilitate an expansion of Stamford Bridge.Media reported in February 2016 that Chelsea had agreed a deal to use Wembley Stadium for three seasons beginning in 2017-18 for an agreement of £20 million. Though Chelsea wanted exclusive rights to Wembley the FA suggested that fellow Londoners Tottenham Hotspur F.C. and Chelsea rivals may share the stadium for 2017-18 season only, as Spurs build their new stadium. The FA wanted to show no favourites in using the national stadium. Wembley Stadium is restricted to hosting only 37 major events a year by Brent Council having a 90,000 capacity however there are no restrictions on events of under 50,000 people. Because of this Chelsea will be capped at 50,000 for most games and will be allowed the full 90,000 capacity for the big games against the top 6 clubs and UEFA Champions League fixtures.


=== Legal Hurdles ===
In May 2017  the Crosthwaithes family launched legal proceedings in the form of an injunction in order to prevent Chelsea from expanding stamford bridge. The family's argument was that there will be almost 17,000 hospitality seats, 28% of the total. They would prefer to throttle the growth of Chelsea F.C. by legally forcing them to limit hospitality seating. This in light of the fact that they were offered  legal advice worth £50,000, and further compensation understood to be in the region of a six-figure sum in exchange for them to waive their 'right to light' in their home. The club then sought the help of Hammersmith & Fulham Council in order to continue with the Stamford Bridge Redevelopment Project.  In January 2018 the council sided with the club by planning to use its powers under planning law to buy the air rights over part of Stamford Bridge and the railway line which sits between the stadium and the two affected homes. It would then lease the land back to Chelsea and railway operators Network Rail, meaning the Crosthwaites would be entitled to compensation but would not be able to prevent the redevelopment.


=== Scope of the Redevelopment ===
The Stamford Redevelopment Project encompasses an area of around 12.1 acres (48967 m2). The northern boundaries are formed by Railway lines to the north & the east, while Fulham Road forms the southern boundary. Sir Oswald Stoll Mansions form the western frontier. The club carried out a public consultation in June 2017 to gain feedback about the stadium design. The project is expected to be constructed in a phased manner. 
Phase I – The first phase involves the tearing down of the club museum, the health club, the health spa, Millennium & Copthrone Hotels  & the entirety of Chelsea village. This phase intends to be completed while the club continue to play at Stamford Bridge & is expected to last a year. The main contractor of this phase of the project has yet to be determined.
Phase II – This phase is expected to cover the demolition of the stadium and the facilities contained within it.
Phase III – This involves the building of a decked surface from Fulham Station in the north west & north to Fulham road in the south barring the land not owned as part of the freehold of stamford bridge. From Sir Oswald Stoll Mansions in the west to the Railway lines in the east. This phase will also involve a reduced level dig.
Phase IV – Consists of building the new stadium.


=== Suspension of planned redevelopment ===
On 31 May 2018 the club released a statement via their website stating that the "Chelsea Football Club announces today that it has put its new stadium project on hold. No further pre-construction design and planning work will occur." The statement went on to elaborate that "The club does not have a time frame set for reconsideration of its decision. The decision was made due to the current unfavourable investment climate. "
