
== Structure and facilities ==

The pitch is surrounded by four all-seater stands, the Sir Bobby Robson Stand, the Cobbold Stand, the Sir Alf Ramsey Stand and the East of England Co-operative Stand.  All stands are covered and are multi-tiered.The Cobbold Stand was constructed in 1971, and originally known as the Portman Stand. With two tiers and a cantilever roof, it is used to accommodate away fans, with an allocation of up to 3,000 seats per game and for family seating.  It also contains a number of executive boxes as well as regular seating for home fans. The Sir Alf Ramsey Stand is a two-tiered stand which has a match-day capacity of approximately 7,000.  It also houses the "Sir Bobby Robson Suite" restaurant and "Legends Bar".  The tunnel, from which the players emerge onto the pitch from their dressing rooms, is unusually located in the corner of the stadium between the Sir Alf Ramsey Stand and the East of England Co-operative Stand.The East of England Co-operative Stand, constructed in 1957, was updated to an all-seater stand in 1990 and currently has three tiers consisting of home fan seating and an additional family area.  It also contains the directors' box, further executive boxes and the press area.  Behind the stand is a full-size AstroTurf pitch which is often used on a casual basis by fans before home games. The Sir Bobby Robson Stand was completely rebuilt in 2001 and has a capacity of around 7,500. It is a two-tier cantilever stand which is divided into an adults-only lower tier "...traditionally for the 'hard core' Town fan..."  and a mixed upper tier.

There are nine areas throughout the ground designated for disabled supporters, in the lower East of England Co-operative Stand, the Sir Alf Ramsey Stand and the Sir Bobby Robson Stand.  These provide over 300 spaces to accommodate wheelchair users and ambulant disabled, together with their carers.  The ground also provides 12 seats in the East of England Co-operative Stand for visually impaired spectators with commentary via individual radio headsets in each seat, provided by local radio station BBC Radio Suffolk.The former groundsman, Alan Ferguson, received a number of accolades, including both Premiership and Championship Groundsman of the Year, and the pitch was voted the best in the Championship for three consecutive seasons in 2003, 2004 and 2005.There are statues of Sir Alf Ramsey and Sir Bobby Robson, both former Ipswich Town and England managers, outside the ground. Nearby Portman's Walk was renamed Sir Alf Ramsey Way in 1999.
