
== Future development ==
In the Scunthorpe Telegraph on 14 December 2006 it was announced that the club were looking to expand the Doncaster Road End of the stadium. Potential improvements mentioned included a second tier and expansion of the club's restaurant. In announcing the plan for expansion, the club's chairman Steven Wharton acknowledged that they were not currently filling the stadium to capacity on a regular basis, but added that he was preparing for a future situation where a larger capacity could be required. This would have been the first major redevelopment of any stand at Glanford Park since its opening, however these plans were later shelved.
Under government regulations the club would have been required to convert the Doncaster Road End to seating if relegation from the Championship had been avoided in 2010–11. In an effort to overturn this ruling, supporters launched a Keep Scunthorpe Standing campaign. The club revealed revised expansion details in September 2010, with plans to add a three-level building behind the current terrace to include a larger supporters' bar, club shop and ticket office. The capacity of the ground would not have increased; this is due to the change from a terrace to a seating area. As it so happened, the Iron were relegated from the Championship at the end of the 2010–11 season and so these plans never came to fruition.
In January 2014, it was revealed that Scunthorpe United proposed a move to a brand new stadium. The projected cost of the project was £18 million and the new stadium was intended to have a capacity of 12,000. The new stadium was intended to integrate the stadium with 24/7 businesses, including a hotel, an office, training and catering facilities in order to maximize revenue for the club. It was further announced in July 2014 that the site of the new stadium was intended to form the focal point of the new 'Lincolnshire Lakes' development. The project was planned for commencement during 2015-2016. Due to issues regarding procurement of the land for the new stadium and issues with one of the developers, the intended site of the new stadium was moved approximately 500 m to the South, and the construction start date was been pushed back to some point in late 2017. In October 2017, Scunthorpe United confirmed that the proposal to relocate to the new stadium had been dropped, stating a new aim to instead redevelop and extend Glanford Park, thus securing the immediate future of the stadium for the time being.
