
== Sports ==
The major sporting body in the town is Widnes Vikings Rugby League Football Club. Cup kings of the 1970s, and 1980s, they were World Club Champions in 1989, after defeating Australian side Canberra Raiders at Old Trafford. More recently, they were winners of the Northern Rail Cup in 2007and 2009. Their home ground is Select Security Stadium in Lowerhouse Lane, which is owned and run by Halton Borough Council. In addition to being a sporting ground it has facilities for conferences and banqueting.  In October 2007 the club was defeated in the National League One Grand Final. Following this, and because of the club's financial situation, its board decided to put it into administration.  It was subsequently purchased by Steve O'Connor, a local businessman. Stobart Stadium Halton was also the temporary home of St Helens R.F.C., they were using the stadium for the 2011 season while their new stadium - Langtree Park - in St. Helens was completed.The Widnes Vikings have been in the Super league since 2009
In Heath Road is a rugby union club, Widnes Rugby Union Football Club (otherwise known as "the wids"), an amateur sports club which is managed and administered by volunteers. The players are all club members and pay subscriptions. The club welcomes and encourages the development of rugby within all sections of the local community by promoting links with local schools, local authorities and the Rugby Football Union constituency body.Widnes Cricket Club (WA8 9LA) was founded in 1865 and have its ground in Beaconsfield Road. Moorfield Sports & Social Club in Moorfield Road hosts sports including Football, rugby league, cricket and bowls. In Highfield Road is a private golf club.
Widnes Tennis Academy is located on Highfield Rd, WA8 7DW, sharing an entrance with St Peter and Pauls School. This is a privately operated facility consisting of 3 in-door courts, six floodlit outside courts and a gym. It is a Beacon facility and has many links with schools, the local authority and the LTA to promote and develop tennis in the area. It is the home of Lane Tennis Club (Est 1876) which has a number of men's, women's and junior teams playing competitively in the Warrington District League.  Other sports facilities are available.Widnes is home to a MMA Gym, the Wolfslair MMA Academy. This was established in 2004 by MMA fans and Anthony McGann and Lee Gwynn. Since then the academy has trained MMA fighters including current UFC Middleweight champion Michael Bisping and former Light-Heavyweight champion Quinton Jackson.In March 2012 it was announced that a new football club Widnes Vikings F.C. had been formed, after the club formerly known as Widnes Dragons joined the Vikings Sports Brand. The club currently plays in the  North West Counties Football League. In June 2014, the club became known as Widnes Football Club, after distancing themselves from the Vikings brand. After promotion to the North West Counties Premier Division at the end of the 2016/2017 season, The Whites gained automatic promotion to the Evo-Stik Western Division at the end of the 2017/18 season, becoming the first side since AFC Fylde to achieve back-to-back promotions from the North West Counties Football League.
Since May 2013 there has been an Ice Hockey club Widnes Wild based at the Silver Blades ice rink which plays in the English National Hockey League Laidler Conference.
