
== Stands ==


=== West Stand ===
Capacity: 2,918

The West Stand is the new main stand at Brisbane Road and currently seats home supporters only. It has a capacity of 2,918, with 23 disabled supporters and their helpers. The letters L O F C are marked into the seats in black. It is also home to the club's offices, and the club shop and ticket office are at the back of this stand. There is also a row of executive seating (the Directors' Balcony) above the main seating which overhangs the rest of the stand, and the Olympic Suite which offers corporate hospitality. This stand also has premium seating (with its own bar) in its centre, known as the Gallery. It has two refreshment outlets at either end underneath the stand and it is accessed by turnstiles at either end via Oliver Road, or via the main reception for Gallery members and Olympic Suite diners.
The players' changing rooms are also located underneath this stand and players emerge from the tunnel here. The dugouts are also located at the front of this stand after being moved from the opposite East Stand for the start of the 2006–07 season.


=== East Stand ===
Capacity: 3,636

The East Stand, previously the main stand, is the oldest stand at Brisbane Road and is used by both home and away supporters. When an away team is allocated the entire stand for safety or other reasons, Orient fans in the North half of the stand are required to move elsewhere to accommodate the extra away fans. The capacity of the Northern end of this stand is 2,133 and the Southern end is 1,459. There are also executive seats in the middle of the stand (the old directors' box, now known as the Wyvern Suite) but these are not ordinarily used by any supporters.

East Stand North: 2,133 with 15 disabled supporters and their helpers
East Stand South (away): 1,459 with seven disabled supporters and their helpers


=== Baskin Robbins North Family Stand ===
Capacity: 1,381
The North Stand was completed for the start of the 2007–08 season and is currently used as a family stand. It replaces a former open terrace, has a capacity of 1,351 with provision for 15 disabled supporters and their helpers, and has the letters L O F C marked into the seats in black. Access to this stand is by turnstiles at each end of the stand and there are two refreshment outlets located underneath the stand.
The stand has been sponsored by the CEO of Baskin Robbins, Nigel Travis, since 2012. Travis, a lifelong Orient fan, purchased the club itself in 2017.


=== Tommy Johnston South Stand ===
Capacity: 1,336
This stand was built in 1999 and was formerly called the South Stand. It was renamed the 'Tommy Johnston Stand' in 2008 in memory of Leyton Orient's record goalscorer Tommy Johnston, but is currently referred to by the club as the Tommy Johnston South Stand. It is currently for home supporters only and has a capacity of 1,336. It has a refreshment outlet and a bar underneath the stand and is accessed through turnstiles from Buckingham Road. It has the word ORIENT marked into the seats in white. A large block of flats backs on to the stand.
