
== Uses ==


=== Speedway ===
Before the Shay, the Halifax Dukes used a track at Thrum Hall, and on 8 February 1949 construction began on a new Motorcycle speedway track at the Shay.
This meant that the football pitch had to be reduced in size and each goalpost was moved three yards into the playing area so an agreement was reached by the speedway and soccer clubs whereby the Halifax Dukes had to pay the Halifax Town AFC 10% of all speedway gate receipts.The first speedway meeting was held on Wednesday 6 April 1949, and the opponents were Yarmouth Bloaters. The track was officially opened by Major R.E. Austin, commanding officer of the Duke of Wellington's Regiment at Halifax. 
Speedway at the Shay was not popular and poor attendances saw the club struggling financially. On 10 November 1951 speedway promoter Bruce Booth brought midget car racing to the Shay to boost funds. 15,000 spectators attended this one-off venture – 3 times higher that the average speedway gate. 
On 31 March 1952, Booth announced the end of speedway 'while rates and taxation remains at the present levels'.In November 1962 Middlesbrough speedway promoter Reg Fearman saw the Shay for the first time, and in 1963 he made a formal application to Halifax Town for use of the ground to revive the sport. At the beginning of 1965 work began on constructing the ground and speedway returned. The second time around it proved successful, and remained at the ground for the next twenty years. By the 1970s people valued it greater than football for family entertainment, with the Dukes producing such renowned riders as Eric Boocock and Kenny Carter. Attendances became regularly higher than those of the football club and the Shay often hosted speedway internationals.
In 1986, after disputes over money with Halifax Town AFC, the speedway club moved out of town to neighbouring Bradford and the Odsal Stadium, becoming known as the Bradford Dukes.
The shale surfaced speedway track at the Shay was 370 metres (400 yd) long.


=== Rugby League ===
In 1998 rugby league club Halifax sold their historic home ground Thrum Hall, which had been their home since 1886 for £1.5 million to the retail chain Asda and moved their base to the Shay.There have been many top players for Halifax over the years, including internationals, tourists and overseas stars. The leading 36 of these are featured in a "Hall of Fame" in the Weavers Bar at the Shay Stadium.During 2011 as a result of pitch renovation work at the Kirklees Stadium in Huddersfield, Huddersfield RLFC played three home fixtures of Super League XVI at the Shay.2013 Rugby League World Cup
The Shay played host to a Group C game as part of the 2013 World Cup between Tonga and Italy.
