
== Background ==
Barnet F.C. Chairman Anthony Kleanthous had sought to move the club from Underhill Stadium since the 1990s due to the poor facilities at the ground. Attempts to move either to Barnet Copthall athletics stadium or to the greenbelt site directly to the south of Underhill were both unsuccessful, with John Prescott over-ruling a move to Copthall in 2001 after planning permission had initially been granted.Construction of the stadium at the council owned Prince Edward Playing Fields in Canons Park had originally begun in 2003, specifically as a new home for Wealdstone F.C. In late 2004, Wealdstone's investment partners in the project went into liquidation, bringing construction work at the site to a sudden halt due to lack of funds to pay the builders. With Wealdstone unable to afford the completion on their own, there was no progress at the half-built site for two years, Harrow London Borough Council then decided to put the site up for tender in 2006, and Barnet F.C. bought the right to occupy the site as a result of this.Barnet F.C. eventually moved into the stadium in summer 2013 due to disagreement with Barnet London Borough Council with regards to the lease of the land surrounding their home since 1907, Underhill Stadium, as well as the limited facilities at Underhill restricting the club's income. The awarding of the Barnet Copthall site to Saracens F.C., effectively ending Barnet F.C.'s hopes of ever moving to that site, accelerated the move to the Hive further.The club originally claimed they intended the use of the stadium at the Hive to be a temporary arrangement, with the long term aim to build a 10,000 capacity stadium back in the London Borough of Barnet. However that changed in 2015  with the chairman announcing the club will no longer look for a home elsewhere.  Initially there was  a restriction on the lease of the Hive that prevented its use for football league matches, Barnet F.C. were granted a 10-year change to this condition which came into effect in June 2015.  Earlier this year the owner purchased the freehold from the London Borough of Harrow and so this restriction no longer applies.
