
== Current stands and capacity ==

Kingsmeadow comprises the following stands:

John Green Stand – (formerly the "Nongshim Stand") a newly built, covered behind-the-goal all-seater stand with 1,000 seats. It was first sponsored by Nong Shim Ltd., South Korea's largest processed food manufacturer, whose UK head office is based locally in New Malden. The rebuilding of the stand increased the stadium capacity to approximately 4,850. It was renamed the "John Green Stand" for the 2015 season after the American bestselling author, whose keen interest in the team has led to a sponsorship agreement. Before the start of the 2015/2016 season the club installed a camera gantry above the stand in order to get different angles for replays to be shown on Dons Player. However, during 2017 the gantry was deemed unsafe, and is therefore not used during matches.
Paul Strank Stand – the all-seater main stand with 1,265 seats, which also includes the stadium's changing rooms, offices, three bars and other facilities. The main stand was extended during the 2008–09 season, adding additional seats and also extending the roof to provide better protection from rain. It was also renamed the Paul Strank Stand at this time. Paul Strank is a supporter and major benefactor of AFC Wimbledon, hence it was named in his honour.
RyGas Stand – (formerly the "East Stand" and "Your Golf Travel Stand") is a partially covered shallow terrace along the length of the pitch, opposite the main Paul Strank Stand. AFC Wimbledon are about to commence a feasibility study regarding the best way to upgrade this area of the ground, which must meet football league standards by May 2014. Due to AFC Wimbledon's desire to move to a stadium in Wimbledon in the medium to long term, the solution is most likely to be whatever is most cost effective. This stand also holds the camera gantry at the stadium as well as the scoreboard.
Chemflow End – (formerly the "Athletics End" & the "Tempest End") a covered behind-the-goal deep terrace. Its original name came from the Kingston Athletics Centre which sits directly behind the stand. The terrace was covered during the 2005–06 season and renamed the "Tempest End" in recognition of the sponsorship of Tempest Sports, Wimbledon's exclusive kit manufacturer since the club's inception, who had partially paid for the development. For the 2013–14 season the stand was renamed the "EcoHouse End" in a new sponsorship deal with EcoHouse Group, which has its main European office in nearby Richmond. During 2016 the stand was renamed the Chemflow end in another sponsership deal.As of October 2012, the stadium has a capacity of 4,850. It originally was designated to have a 6,299 capacity before modern safety requirements and ground improvements (such as re-profiling the Athletics End terrace and replacing the original terraced paddock in front of the main stand with seats) required the capacity to be reduced. Kingstonian's highest attendance at Kingsmeadow was 4,582 v Chelsea (friendly) on 22 July 1995. AFC Wimbledon's highest attendance at Kingsmeadow was 4,870 against Accrington Stanley on 14 May 2016 which set the record attendance at Kingsmeadow.
