
== The Battle to Keep Bath Rugby at the Rec ==

In 2006 the Rugby Football Union (RFU) stated that by 2010 all Premiership rugby clubs would need a spectator capacity of at least 15,000, at a time when the Rec's capacity was 10,300. However, the Professional Game Board reduced the minimum capacity required to 10,000 and this is the criterion used currently.
In March 2007 the council trustee of the Rec received a strategic review showing support for the development of the ground by 64% of respondents to a poll (44% supporting development on the current site of the ground). The council trustee wished to proceed with a development proposal that would allow Bath Rugby Club to lease additional land, to permit the provision of a larger rugby ground. The Charity Commission responded that for any such development to proceed they would need to be fully satisfied that any detriment arising to the Rec's charitable objectives from the proposal would be significantly outweighed by benefits.Various detailed development proposals were made, but these could not satisfy the Charity Commission's legal need to protect the Rec's charitable objectives.In June 2009 the Charity Commission again granted permission for the club to continue to use temporary spectator seating on charity land for the 2009/2010 season which together with changes to other seating allowed capacity to increase to 11,700.In November 2009 the new chief executive of Bath Rugby, Nick Blofeld, stated the club was seeking a mostly seated stadium for 20,000, with potential for future expansion, containing "restaurants and cafés, hospitality suites, conference facilities and good food and beverage outlets and other potential retail outlets." The club no longer ruled out other sites within Bath, and was considering the option of moving to the Western Riverside Development. However, by November 2010 the club had virtually ruled out alternative sites in Bath after detailed investigations, preferring to stay at the Rec, with Somerdale, Keynsham as a distant second choice.In July 2010 the Charity Commission again granted permission for the club to continue to use temporary spectator seating on charity land for the 2010/2011 season which together with changes to other seating allowed capacity to increase to 12,300.In December 2010 the Trustees of the Recreation Ground announced that the Charity Commission "have stated that they believe that the Trust is at a point where it is ready to apply for a new scheme which must be done by 31st March 2011". They also made clear that consultations should take place with the beneficiaries. In January 2011 the trust delayed the consultation because of "unexpected details that need to be resolved". Negotiations about a possible land swap with Bath Rugby's training facilities at Lambridge are taking place.The Recreation Ground Trustees held a meeting on 13 April 2011 and agreed to launch the consultation document proposing to put forward a Scheme to the Charity Commission.  The scheme consulted on was to swap the Bath Rugby Lambridge training ground for the Rugby Ground at the Rec and to allow the Leisure Centre to remain on open space land.
On 7 July 2011 the Trustees announced the results of the consultation in that 4,000 + responses had been received and 86% were in favour of the land swap to correct the abuse of the usage of the Rugby Club and to change the objects of the Trust to allow the Leisure Centre to remain on open space.It was announced in the Western Daily Press on 17 August 2012 that "The Charity Commission has agreed in principle to the plans for a land-swap deal, which would allow the club to expand its presence on the city centre site in exchange for its training ground at Lambridge effectively becoming publicly owned."
On 30 November 2012 the Charity Commission published a draft Scheme to correct the two errors in the use of the charitable land. The Leisure Centre use is corrected by the change in the objects of the Charity to allow indoor activities. The use by the rugby ground is to be corrected by a land swap with land nearly double the size of the Rec rugby ground. The Charity Commission invited representations to their draft scheme within 28 days.In February 2013 the Charity Commission stated that they had received 1,868 representations of which 244 objected to the Scheme allowing the land swap. The Charity Commission stated that they needed to study all the representations before a final decision was expected in April 2013. In opposition to the scheme, local resident Jack Sparrow lodged an application to have the Recreation Ground declared a Town Green. The Council received 7 objections and 18 representations for the proposal. On Friday 15 November 2013, Bath and North East Somerset Council’s Regulatory (Access) Committee resolved to refuse the Application to register Bath Recreation Ground as a Town or Village Green pursuant to section 15 of the Commons Act 2006.
On 12 June 2013 it was announced by David Dixon, the Chairman of the Recreation Ground Trust, that the Charity Commission had agreed the "land swap"  by a scheme allowing the Rugby Club to develop the rugby ground on the Rec and that the Trust will have use of land previously used for training by the Rugby Club at Lambridge for charitable use. The Scheme made by the Charity Commission and the decision document from the Reviewing Officer of the Charity Commission.On 27 March 2014 three appeal judges of The First-Tier Tribunal (Charity) allowed the Scheme with amendments. As regards the Rugby Club they were limited to the actual footprint they currently use. This is smaller than they wanted but still could be enough for a 16k arena development. The Club has stated that they will press on with their plans. The Judgement in full. The new Trustee Board of the Recreation Ground Trust (RGT) agreed at their meeting on 7 April 2014 to appeal the judgement. The plans to temporarily increase the capacity of the Rec by nearly 2,000 seats and upgrade the facilities ahead of Bath Rugby's 150th anniversary, were approved on 30 July 2014.On 30 July 2015 the Trustee Board was successful in their appeal to the Upper Tribunal in a case held at the Royal Courts of Justice on 18 May 2015. In essence this judgement allows the Trustees to manage the Recreation Ground for the public at large in a manner that will further its charitable objects. The full judgement can be read hereThe Lower Tribunal were tasked to revise the scheme which was agreed on 14 December 2016. In essence the new scheme is as follows:

The Trust must provide for the Rec to be used for "outdoor recreational facilities for the benefit of the public"
The Trust should ensure it is principally used for "games and sports of all kinds" but not show undue preference in favour of any particular game, sport, person, club, body or organisation
The Trust shall not use the Rec otherwise than as an open space, but it does not have to be kept in its present form
As "absolute owner", the Trust can sell, lease, license or otherwise dispose of all or any part of the Rec
The Trust can exchange or swap all or any part of the Rec for replacement land in or near Bath
When the leisure centre is no longer fit for purpose it must be demolished
Changes to some aspects of the scheme can be made by the Trust, but only if at least 75 per cent of trustees who are then in office and eligible to vote, vote in favour.Opinion in Bath about the future of rugby on the Rec is somewhat polarised, as evidenced by the development of two opposing lobby groups (see below).
