
== Structure and facilities ==

The ground can accommodate 8,256 supporters, including seating for 3,409, and comprises four stands; the Main Stand, the Popular Stand, the David Longhurst Stand and the Grosvenor Road End.The Main Stand, which can seat 1,757 spectators, is an all-seated stand which runs around two-thirds of the pitch. It contains the dressing rooms, club offices, ticket offices and hospitality suites, and contains a number of supporting pillars. The stand has open corners to either side, one of which is where the supporters' club is located, and to the rear has windscreens to either side. At the front of it is the Family Stand, which offers adjusted rates for children and their carers. Opposite is the Popular Stand, a covered all-seated stand, which contains a number of supporting pillars and holds a television gantry on its roof. It can seat 1,652 spectators.The northernmost stand of the ground is the David Longhurst Stand, which is a covered terrace for home supporters and has a row of supporting pillars across its front. The stand was originally known as the Shipton Street End, but was renamed following the death of David Longhurst, and has a capacity of 3,062. Opposite is the Grosvenor Road End, an open terrace reserved for away supporters, which holds a capacity of 1,785. As well as this, away fans are permitted to use 332 seats of the Popular Stand, in the section closest to the Grosvenor Road End. The toilet facilities for away supporters consist of open air urinals and Portakabins.The grass pitch measures 104 by 64 metres (114 by 70 yd).> Head groundsman Bryan Foster was presented with a gold watch from the directors in March 1988, in recognition of his long and outstanding service. His successor, Bryan Horner, was voted the Second Division groundsman of the year in 1999. A club shop is situated just inside the car park, which also houses the commercial manager's office. Adjoining this is the social club, known as the 1922 Bar since August 2015, and the players' bar.
