
== History ==
The Austrian Shorthaired Pinscher was recognised as a breed for the first time in 1928, but the breed was developed from an old type of pinscher found on farms in the  Austrian countryside, a mixture of German Pinschers and the local dogs. Claims of great antiquity have been made for the old pinscher type. Since there are no records, it is not possible to tell how the old type is related to the modern-day breed, although they do look somewhat similar.
At the end of the 19th century, the farm dogs began to die out when the work they did was no longer needed. In the early 20th century Emil Hauck, looking for an aboriginal dog type identified in 1843 by H. von Meyer as Canis palustris or dog of the marshes (a type of dog, not an actual species), found what he believed were some examples of similar dogs in the Austrian countryside. In 1921 he began serious breeding to revive and define the type of the breed, to separate them from other landrace pinschers of the area. The Austrian Kennel Club (Österreicher Kynologenverband) first recognised the breed as the Österreichischer Kurzhaarpinscher (translates in English as Austrian Shorthaired Pinscher) in 1928. The name was given to the breed to identify its place of origin as Austria (Österreich), and to differentiate it from the Schnauzer which at that time was called the Rough-haired Pinscher (rauhaariger Pinscher). After World War II, though, the breed almost vanished. In the 1970s only one registered dog of the breed remained, named Diokles of Angern. Breeding this dog with other dogs identified as of the old pinscher type in the area ("Landpinschern") has brought the breed back, although there are still only a small number of them.Ark Austria (Arche Austria), an association for the preservation of endangered indigenous breeds, lists the Austrian Pinscher and states that it is highly vulnerable, with only 6 to 12 breeding animals, who are being carefully bred to preserve health and breed type.The breed is recognised in its country of origin by the Österreischer Kynologenverband (ÖKV, Austrian Kennel Club) and internationally by the Fédération Cynologique Internationale in the Pinscher section of Group 2. It is also recognised by the United Kennel Club in the United States as the Austrian Pinscher as of 2006, in the Terrier Group, for its background as a rat hunter. In addition it is recognised by a number of minor kennel clubs and internet based dog registry businesses under a variety of translations of the name, who may rewrite the standard to suit producers of dogs for the rare breed pet market. Purchasers of puppies and dogs from groups outside the Austrian breed restoration program should read the original standard (obtainable in translation from the FCI) and their dog's pedigree to make sure they are buying an Austrian Pinscher and not an excessively inbred or a random-bred dog.
