
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===

English Shepherds are similar in appearance to Border Collies and Australian Shepherds. English Shepherds usually have tails and a less rounded head than many Aussies. English Shepherds are never merle as Aussies frequently are. They are generally not square in body like an Aussie. English Shepherds tend to be larger than Border Collies but are most readily distinguished from Border Collies by their very different upright, loose-eyed herding style.

The English Shepherd is a medium-sized dog, usually somewhat longer than it is tall. It generally weighs between 20 to 30 kilograms (44 to 66 lb) and is balanced in proportions.  As a working dog on small farms, English Shepherds have been selected to fulfill a variety of needs. This has resulted in a wide range of regional variations.
The coat is medium length and can be straight, wavy, or curly. There is frequently feathering on the legs and tail, as well as on the ear. As a working dog, the coat should be easy to keep, requiring very little grooming. Dirt tends to just fall away. English shepherds tend to shed quite a lot and fur may be found on and under furniture, clothes, and carpeting. The primary coat colors are: sable and white (clear and shaded), tricolor, black and white, and black and tan. Other variations such as solid dogs of any color, piebalds, and red nosed tricolors and sables also exist but are not common.


=== Temperament ===

The English Shepherd temperament is the defining characteristic of the breed, with high intelligence and often a unique type of kindness for those in his home, both animals and people. The English Shepherd is often an independent worker. English Shepherds are adaptable and learn routines quickly. Some can be watchful of strangers and are more one-person dogs. However, once he accepts people or children or stock as his own, there are few better caretakers than an English Shepherd.
The English Shepherd frequently exhibits an independent, bossy or "enforcer of the rules" streak in his temperament. If the dog's desire to enforce order is not channeled and directed to a suitable end by a strong, confident leader, he may exhibit many undesirable behaviors. Nevertheless, English shepherds can thrive as companion dogs in environments that provide sufficient mental and physical stimulation.
English Shepherds require a lot of exercise (at least 40 minutes of walking per day) and may become destructive if not provided enough. They have a natural instinct to chase and enjoy playing a game of fetch. They tend to become calm and relaxed at the end of the day, likely to curl up at their owner's feet.
This breed was selected on diverse small family farms in the past and has been selected to work in a partnership arrangement with his master.
