
== Classification conundrum ==
The historic and modern hunting uses of Rhodesian Ridgebacks have included everything from upland game birds to larger 'dangerous game'. While the hunting versatility of the breed has served it well in the field, it has caused much confusion and contention among ridgeback fanciers about what these dogs are, and are not, as hunting companions. Throughout its history, the Rhodesian Ridgeback has been a breed of dog that has somewhat defied the strict interpretation of most conventional group classification paradigms.


=== Classification history ===
In 1922 Bulawayo, Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe), Francis Barnes standardised the breed using the existing Dalmatian standard as a model - there was no mention of a preferred group placement. Although no parent club was 'officially' recognised at the time, in September 1924 the South African Kennel Union began taking "lion dog" registrations. In February 1926, SAKU (KUSA) officially recognised the Rhodesian Parent Club. At the behest of Barnes, SAKU also made two changes at this time:

The union's official name for the breed was changed from 'Rhodesian lion dog' to 'Rhodesian Ridgeback'.
The breed was placed in the union's 'gundog' group.On this second point Barnes was emphatic, stating "I am breeding a gundog." The Rhodesian Ridgeback remained classified as a gundog for over 20 years thence.

Although the Rhodesian Ridgeback's bird hunting prowess has been well known throughout the breed's history (the original description from the South African parent club belabors this point in fact), it is important to note that the "gundog" classification made in 1920s Southern Rhodesia and South Africa was not specifically about bird hunting. To understand this it is necessary to understand the union's classification system at that time. The two likely categories Barnes could have chosen from within the SAKU classification system at that time were, "sporting" and "gundog". In the "sporting" group were the sighthounds and scenthounds. In the "gundog" group were the birddogs. This raises the question why Barnes rejected the group containing the sighthounds and scenthounds, and successfully lobbied in favour of the group containing the birddogs. Barnes' reasoning becomes clear with an understanding of the distinction between the two groups. The union's "sporting" dogs were those that would find game above ground, and were then expected to dispatch the game without assistance. The union's "gundogs" were those that find game above ground, and the human hunter was then expected to dispatch the game by means of a firearm. Within this context, the Rhodesian Ridgeback—which was clearly expected to hold the lion at bay for the hunter, not to attempt to dispatch the lion unassisted by the gun—placement in the union’s gundog group becomes the logical choice within that system as it existed at that time.Over time the culturally perceived meanings of the group labels had changed to those closer to their modern meanings, and the union eventually became a federated member of the FCI, and therefore adopted its group categorisation system. By 1940, Barnes had resigned from the Rhodesian Parent Club and prompted by the lobbying of a newer generation of leadership within the Rhodesian Parent Club, in the 1950s, the breed's group classification was changed from "gundog" to "hound".


=== Classification theories ===

Today, there are at least five competing theories concerning proper group placement for the Rhodesian Ridgeback.
Scenthound
- This theory arises from the fact that the southern African landscape in general, and the Zimbabwean landscape specifically, is an extremely varied and diverse terrain, where a true sighthound would be severely handicapped in its finding ability in the game producing cover of the bushveldt, thornveldt, and kopjes. Proponents of the scenthound classification also observe that the ridgeback bears very little resemblance to the decidedly northern African desert breed sighthounds, in either form or function. And while proponents of this theory freely admit that ridgebacks are undoubtedly athletic 'running' dogs, they draw the distinction that ridgebacks do not pursue game by sheer speed, which is typical of the true sighthounds associated with the northern half of the continent.Sighthound
- This theory is based on the fact that some of the foundation stock used by Cornelius Van Rooyen during the creation of the breed was sighthound stock. Support for this theory has grown in areas (most notably in the United States) where ridgebacks have been allowed to compete with sighthounds in lure-coursing field trials. The theory's detractors contend that success in lure coursing trials does not in and of itself make a dog a true sighthound, and further bolster their contention by pointing out that ridgebacks are very poor performers when allowed to run in unofficial open field courses where they typically cannot keep up with the true sighthounds. Even so, no one can argue that ridgebacks have not been successful at lure coursing events. In fact ridgebacks have been very competitive in almost every lure coursing venue in which they have been allowed to compete. Proponents of this theory will often further defend it with a (debated) claim that while ridgebacks are versatile and use all their senses, their first and strongest inclination is to find game by sight—which itself is considered normal for dogs of any type, when the game is actually in sight.Cur-dog
- This theory is based on the United Kennel Club's (the leading 'working dog' registry in the U.S. in terms of numbers of dogs registered) classification system which, within the scenthounds, includes a sub-group known as "cur dogs". Contrary to the traditional/historical meaning of the term "cur", these dogs are neither mongrels, nor dogs of dubious breeding or value. Quite the contrary, the UKC cur-dogs are pure-bred, versatile hunting and livestock dogs. These pure breeds were typically developed by pioneering people who needed a dog that was highly protective of the family and farm, as well as a capable stock driver. Most importantly the dog was required to pursue various species of game both small and large game alike, in a manner inconsistent with the rest of the hounds (sight or scent). The cur-dog does so using all of its senses - hearing, sight, and scent as the situation demands. This classification theory is consistent with old breed descriptions, which are somewhat contrary to the more classical sighthound/scenthound types, like the one offered in an advertisement run by the Rhodesian Parent Club in a show catalogue in 1926, "... Rhodesian Ridgeback (lion dogs) are unsurpassed for hunting and veld work. Ever faithful and loyal to their owners, highly intelligent and reliable guards."Wagon dog/wagon hound
- This theory was forwarded at the 2008 Rhodesian Ridgeback World Congress, and contends that an honest evaluation of the breed's functional history indicates that during its formative development and early use as a breed, the ridgeback was much more a "hunter's/farmer's ox-wagon dog" than it was a "lion dog". This theory aligns itself with the current FCI classification of the breed, group 6.3 (a special type of scenthound). However, the important distinction in this theory is not that the FCI classification of "scenthound" is accurate, but rather, that placing the Dalmatian and the Rhodesian Ridgeback (the only breeds currently in FCI group 6.3), breeds that historically have served as versatile hunting/wagon dogs, should indeed be classified as two examples of the same type of dog, but further asserts that such dogs’ classification makes more sense as a discrete group. This classification theory is generally supported by historical accounts that mirror the one offered by Phyllis Archdale who went to Southern Africa in 1919 and bred ridgebacks there in the 1920s, "Old timers told me that in early days most Dutch transport riders had a Ridgehound as guard to their wagons. They were used to bail up lion and wild pig. Mine did both..."

Ridged primitive
- There is also a group of ridgeback fanciers who believe Rhodesian Ridgebacks should be thought of in terms of the FCI's group 5.8. FCI group 5 includes the spitz and related primitives. FCI group 5.8 specifically is "primitive type hunting dogs with a ridge on the back". The theory's detractors note that the Rhodesian Ridgeback was not only developed in the late 19th century and standardised in the early 20th century, but developed specifically to "hunt to the gun" and as such is in fact a very modern creation, and anything but "primitive". But supporters of the theory contend that enough of the foundational stock is ancient, including the greyhound and the Khoikhoi dog (from which the ridged back derives), that even though it was developed relatively recently and for use with modern firearms, the breed can still be considered to be of a "primitive type".


=== Current registry classifications ===
Presently, the breed is categorised as a "hound" by every major registry throughout the world. For example, the British Kennel Club and the Canadian Kennel club both categorise the Rhodesian Ridgeback as a hound, without any further specification. Both of the major registries in the United States, the AKC and the UKC, currently further distinguish the breed as a sighthound. The FCI, the largest international canine governing body, which looks to the parent club in the country of origin (the parent club in Zimbabwe) for the breed standard and group classification, currently further distinguishes the Rhodesian Ridgeback as a scenthound.
