
== Temperament ==
Throughout history, the Kuchi people needed their dogs to be extremely vigilant in guarding their livestock and belongings. They trusted their dogs to safeguard their camps and caravans on their seasonal journeys. They also needed their dogs to be extremely tough, not only in the face of danger, but also for braving the rough environmental conditions that required incredible ability to adapt.
The Kuchis travelled from the mountains, through the deserts, in the freezing cold, and in the searing heat, through country that, for days, did not offer shelter, or food, or even water. They needed dogs that would survive in all kinds of extreme conditions, and still be able to perform their duties without hindering the progress of the caravan. They often had no spare time or energy left to feed and take care of their dogs. They could not afford to wait for them if they fell ill, or to keep checking to make sure they don’t fall behind or run off.
The Kuchis needed dogs that would be fierce and possess unmatched stamina, courage and strength, but at the same time would be extremely intelligent, trustworthy and independent. They needed dogs that could function without any special guidance or training.
The resulting breed can be described as representing dogs of unwavering character, strong sense of pride, keen sense of ownership, social status, and territory, demonstrating outstanding tenacity and perseverance, and possessing unrivalled strength and agility, all of which enable them to defend everything that is a part of their turf and extended pack against all predators and intruders.
They can also be extremely friendly and affectionate, and tend to form deep emotional bonds with their 'pack members'. However, their independent minds also make them incompatible with Western lifestyle. They are prone to aggression towards most other dogs, and often humans, who encroach on their territory (this could include postal workers, utility company repairmen, emergency personnel, and even friends and family they have not been acquainted with before), and their territory could extend well beyond the regular house and backyard.
This breed is also very vocal in expressing their emotions. Kuchi dogs often growl to show either pleasure or displeasure, which can be misconstrued by many, especially children, as a sign of aggression - and lead to unwanted and potentially dangerous reactions on their part.
This does not mean that the Kuchi breed is entirely unmanagable. But it does mean that, in order to maintain safety and keep Kuchi dogs and their owners in good health and spirits, these dogs demand special attention from their owners, who should be experts on this particular breed, and on animal behaviour in general.
