
== Appearance ==
There are subtle variations given in the standards used by different countries when describing the height and weight. In the Kangal Shepherd Dog's homeland of Turkey, the only measurements desired are quoted by KIF as a height at the withers of 65 to 78 cm (26 to 31 in) with a two cm tolerance either way. KIF does not differentiate between male and female statistics. Although other standards internationally are fairly consistent with each other, they are at odds with KIF as their guidelines are for a larger dog. In the UK, the Kennel Club interim standard states the height at shoulders should be males 74 to 81 cm (29 to 32 in) with females at 71 to 79 cm (28 to 31 in) without specifying any weight guidelines. The New Zealand Kennel Club quotes height for males as 76 to 81.5 cm (29.9 to 32.1 in) with a weight of 50 to 63 kg (110 to 139 lb) and a bitches height as 71 to 78.5 cm (28.0 to 30.9 in) weighing 41 to 59 kg (90 to 130 lb). In America, the only agency to recognise the breed is the UKC and its standard gives 30 to 32 in (76 to 81 cm) for males, weight 110 to 145 lb (50 to 66 kg) and 28 to 30 in (71 to 76 cm) for females with a weight of 90 to 120 lb (41 to 54 kg).The Kangal Shepherd Dog is not as heavy as some other Mastiff breeds, allowing it greater speed and agility than larger dogs. Kangal Shepherd Dogs can reach speeds of up to 50 km (30 miles) per hour. 
The under-layer provides insulation against both severe Anatolian winters and the fierce summer sun, while the outer-layer repels water and snow. This combination of coat allows it to regulate its core temperature more efficiently, while the coat is dense enough to repel rupture from wolf bites.
Further differences between the KIF standard and those used internationally are found in the guidelines for coat and colour. The registered Kangal Shepherd Dog organizations in Turkey, Cynology Federation Of Turkey (KIF)—to an extent—and Ankara Kangal Derneği (ANKADER) do not regard coat colour as a breed defining feature. Brindle, recessive black tan pattern, white markings and a longer coat are regarded as Kangal and are not usually indicative of cross breeding, as the KIF standard as significant restrictions on accepted color and is more restrictive with respect to white markings than any of the other international standards, as white markings are only accepted on the chest and on the tip of the tail, whereas standards from other kennel clubs allow white markings on the feet and legs. Rather it is head structure and morphology that differentiate Kangal from other Çoban Köpegi. In contrast other kennel clubs describe coat and colour as perhaps the most visible traits that distinguish the Kangal from the Akbash and Anatolian. The coat must be short and dense, not long or feathery, and of a pale fawn or tan color with varying amounts of sable guard hairs. All Kangal Shepherd Dogs have a black facial mask, and black or shaded ears. White at certain points (chest, chin, toes) may or may not be allowed, depending on the standard. Some heavily sabled Kangals also have darker legs and chests. Most importantly, the coat should not be broken, brindled, or spotted. 
Cropping of the ears is done for several reasons, including the cultural demonstration of ownership vice feral dog, for appearance and for protection, as long ears can be vulnerable in a physical confrontation with a predator. It is also believed that cropping improves the dog's hearing because sound can travel into ear easier. It should be noted the cropping of ears is illegal in the UK.

		
		
		
		
