
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===
Males stand 54–60 cm (21–24 in) at the withers; females are shorter, at 49–55 cm (19–22 in). Both sexes weigh 20–23 kg (44.1–50.7 lbs).
The breed has a coat of straight, stiff guard hairs and a fine, soft, thick undercoat. There should be no curl in the hair at all.  The colour must be black with white markings. Often the jet black hair is slightly tinted with brownish highlights on the ends giving it an iridescent quality. Preferably the color percentage is around 70% black and 30% white. The bushy tail curls in a circle over the back in a ring and has a white tip. It falls gently onto the dog's back or to one side. Purebred KBD have tails that curve into a circle rather than a sickle.


=== Temperament ===

The Karelian Bear Dog are often naturally aggressive towards other dogs.  Proper socialization and training is necessary due to their disposition.
They are silent but tenacious hunters and alert only when they have the prey at bay. They will keep prey cornered there by barking in a very high, fast bark and running back and forth or around the animal until their handler comes and dispatches it. Karelian Bear Dogs have been known to hold an animal at bay for a very long time. If a bear tries to leave, the dog will nip at it on the backside and aggravate it to keep it from running away.
They don't always have to hunt with their master, as they can be trained to work with other people. However, they are prone to separation anxiety due to their very social nature. It is very unusual for a KBD to bite a human but it may kill another animal if it feels threatened.
They are very social hunting dogs that prefer an outdoor environment, and need plenty of space to run free and get lots of exercise.  In addition, they need a lot of mental and physical stimulation, as this breed is used to having a job to do.  These traits tend to prevent the breed from becoming popular companion dogs.
Karelian Bear Dogs are very territorial and will alert their handler to the presence of any strangers or other animals nearby that they do not know.
