
== Description ==
The body of Slovak Cuvac is slightly longer than higher. Strong and straight ridge goes - way to lower back - a little bit sloped. Strong square butt is slightly sloped, too. The low-placed tail is worn hanging, reaching hock joints. Chest reaching to elbow joint and chest's width can compared to circa one quarter of scapula's height. Ribs are well rounded and achieving long back. Belly and flanks are slightly pulled. Long scapulas are slant laid. The Slovak Cuvac has straight legs placed vertically to his body and well angled. The front paws are compact, rounded. The back paws are a little bit longer. The neck is as long as head.
The wide and elongated skull is a little bit arched, but the top of the head is flat. With side view are straight line of top of the head and straight line of nose's ridge parallel. The stop is well apparent. The supra-orbital arcs are marked, the frontal groove is flat. The wide and heavy mouth is slightly narrowed to top of the nose and is a little bit shorter than the skull. The lips fit tightly. The ears are placed high, reclined and fitted tightly to the head. The ear points are rounded. The eyes are oval shaped with caps fitting closely, straight placed at the head. The Cuvac has scissors occlusion.
The fur is dense and rich, centre parting at the ridge is not allowed. Covering hair, which is constituted by hair with 5-15 cm length, completely covers the  shorter, dense and soft undercoat. Male dogs have collar around the neck. The fur is pure white. A yellowish tinge by ears is permissible, but not desirable. The eyes are brown. Muzzle, lips edges and eyelids, like the paw pads, are black.  


=== Appearance ===
The breed is an animal of imposing stature. It has a large head, half of which is taken up by the nasal canal. It has strong jaws, with a scissors bite. The oval-shaped eyes are dark and lively. The ears are long and hanging while carried on the sides of the head. The tail is thickly furred, and it hangs down when the dog is at rest. The coat is completely white, and the hair can be as much as 4 inches (10 cm) long. 


=== Height and weight ===
The height for males can be as much as 28 inches (70 cm), while females at the most are 26 inches (65 cm) in height. The weight for males ranges 77 - 99 pounds and the weight for females is 66 - 88 pounds.


=== Temperament ===
The dog is known for its hardy constitution, sturdy frame and shaggy white coat.  Its frame is massive, and his temperament is naturally lively, watchful, undaunted and alert. These dogs thrive best in an environment of a large family, children and livestock to care for.  Farms and ranches make the best homes.  These dogs are natural guard dogs. They are gentle and loyal with their family and possessions.
