
== Portuguese Podengo Medio ==


=== Appearance ===
WIRE COATThe WPM is a medium-sized type with a rough coat that functions as an air conditioner in the hot weather. This coat was preferred in the South of their native Portugal, which is very warm. The single coat (without undercoat) does shed but not very much.

SMOOTH COATThe SPM is a medium-sized type with a dense smooth single layer coat that is extremely low maintenance. It naturally sheds dust and dirt and dries very quickly. For that reason the Smooth Coat variety is preferred in the North of their native Portugal, which has rainy winters. The single coat (without undercoat) does shed but not very much.


=== Temperament ===
Both kinds of Podengo Medio are  friendly, hardy and intelligent companions. They are very active and usually good with children and other animals, including livestock, especially when socialized from an early age.
They are watchful and observant and will bark when something gets their attention. Most enjoy digging and need a secure fence, optimally enclosing their own yard.  As they are very agile, regular fencing might not be enough, as they are excellent jumpers and climbers. The best way to address this is with a high enough fence to prevent jumping and a "fence" below the ground, preferably of hardware cloth.
When trained, Podengo Medios can have good recall when not on leash. While hiking with them, they generally stay in visual distance and "check" on their owners frequently, always being aware of their position (although that can mean a few acres away). Of course, they must be trained with a reliable recall first.
They are enthusiastic, trainable dogs. This led them to star in a number of movies in the 1990s and 2000s, including Dante's Peak, Three Wishes, Homeward Bound II: Lost in San Francisco, Zeus and Roxanne, Secondhand Lions, Can of Worms and Soccer Dog: The Movie. Also The Lake House


=== History ===
The Portuguese Podengo Medio, both smooth and wire-haired, has existed, unregistered, in the United States for decades in small numbers with Portuguese-Americans in private home settings, where they have been used for traditional rabbit hunting.  They were never really popularized outside of their immigrant homesteads. They are attractive, nice family dogs, with a touch of mischief. The first group of Podengo Medio fanciers met in the US in the early 90's via the early internet Gopher (protocol) system. Registered purebred Smooth Podengo Medios began being shown in America in 2004 and registered purebred Wirehaired Podengo Medios began being shown in America in 2005.
The first Wirehaired Podengo Medio to be shown in North America was AM/CDN Ch Evita V.D. Kleiheuvel, owned by Mary Dixon at a United Kennel Club show in Belleville, Michigan. Evita became the first WPM United States Champion (with United Kennel Club) and the first Canadian Podengo Champion (with Canine Federation of Canada). The first Podengo Medio born in North America was Ch Marcos de Retrouvaille and was bred by Dixon. The first Podengo to earn an American Kennel Club Tracking Dog title (on February 17, 2008) was Jolena De Retrouvaille WM, bred by Mary Dixon.
Still rare, breeders in Portugal primarily breed for rabbit hunting, not pets. They are hunting dogs, often kept in kennels, not in homes. The idea of Wirehaired Podengo Medios being kept more as house pets began with breeders in Europe.
