
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===
The Kooikerhondje is a small, flashy, orange and white spaniel-like sporting dog.  Originally bred in The Netherlands as a duck decoy dog, its heavily white plumed tail waves jauntily to entice and lure ducks to follow it into Eendenkooi (elaborate manmade pond trapping systems).  When not working the traps, Kooikers were expected to work on the farm to catch vermin.
The preferred height at the withers is 14.5 to 17.5 inches for males and 13.5 to 16.5 inches for females.  The proportion of the Kooiker is off-square.  The bone and substance of the Kooiker is moderate.  The head should be in proportion to the dog.  The expression is gentle and alert.  Ears should be orange-red in color and well feathered and ideally adorned with earrings.  The color for the Kooiker should preferably be distinct patches of clear orange-red on pure white although a few small spots on the legs are acceptable.  Color should be predominate on the back with the chest, belly, blaze and the majority of the legs and tail white. Black ear   A black tail ring where the color changes from orange-red to white is permitted.  A dog who is solid red on the back is acceptable but not preferred.


=== Temperament ===
Cheerful, good natured, friendly, quiet, well-behaved, and alert; those are terms that are used to describe the Kooikerhondje. Depending on its domestic environment, it is kind, happy and lively. They are also intelligent, attentive and more than willing to please their owner. The Kooikerhondje adapts to situations rather quickly, changing his behavior from quiet to lively when the situation allows him to be. He will not always immediately like strangers, instead choosing to retreat. But once he warms up to someone, the trust will be there for the rest of his life.
The Kooikerhondje can make a fine apartment dog if exercised regularly, but a fenced yard will be more ideal. He has a medium energy level, yet is usually quiet when indoors.  Kooikerhondje can be reactive with strange dogs and are wary of boisterous children, in general.
