
== Transportation ==

Shikoku is connected to Honshu by three expressways, which together form the Honshū–Shikoku Bridge Project.

Kobe-Awaji-Naruto Expressway (Eastern Shikoku)
Seto-Chūō Expressway (Central Shikoku)
Nishiseto Expressway (Western Shikoku)The eastern gateway to Shikoku, Naruto in Tokushima Prefecture has been linked to the Kobe-Awaji-Naruto Expressway since 1998. This line connects Shikoku to the Kansai area which has a large population, including the large conurbations of  Osaka, Kyoto, and Kobe. Therefore, the Kobe-Awaji-Naruto Expressway carries a large traffic volume. Many highway buses are operated between Kansai and Tokushima Prefecture.
The central part of Shikoku is connected to Honshu by ferry, air, and – since 1988 – by the Great Seto Bridge network. Until completion of the bridges, the region was isolated from the rest of Japan. The freer movement between Honshuū and Shikoku was expected to promote economic development on both sides of the bridges, which has not materialized yet.
Within the island, a web of national highways connects the major population centers. These include Routes 11, 32, 33, 55, and 56.
The Shikoku Railway Company (JR Shikoku) serves the island and connects to Honshu via the Great Seto Bridge. JR lines include:

Yosan Line
Dosan Line
Kōtoku Line
Tokushima Line
Mugi Line
Naruto Line
Uchiko Line
Yodo Line
Honshi Bisan Line
Seto Ōhashi LinePrivate railway lines operate in each of the four prefectures on Shikoku.


=== Air travel ===
Shikoku lacks a full international airport but has four regional/domestic airports (Tokushima Airport, Takamatsu Airport, Kōchi Ryōma Airport and Matsuyama Airport). All of these airports have flights to Tokyo and other major Japanese cities such as Osaka, Nagoya, Sapporo, and Fukuoka. International flights to Seoul, South Korea are serviced by Asiana Airlines from Matsuyama and Takamatsu. There are periodic international charter flights as well.
Ferries link Shikoku to destinations including Honshu, Kyūshu, and islands around Shikoku.
