
== History ==

Of the seven breeds of United Kennel Club (UKC) registered coonhounds, the Plott Hound is the only that does not trace its ancestry to the foxhound.
The Plott Balsams, a mountain range in North Carolina, are named for the Plott family, whose ancestor, (Johannes) George Plott (c. 1733-1815), immigrated to North Carolina in the late 18th century from Germany.  The Plott Hound breed of hunting dog, is also named for the Plotts.The ancestors of today's Plott Hounds were used for boar hunting in Germany. Originally from Germany, in 1750 Johannes "George" Plott emigrated to the English colony of North Carolina.  He brought a few wild boar hounds (five Hanoverian Hounds, used for bear and boar hunting) with him. These dogs had been bred for generations for their stamina and gameness. George and his wife Margaret with their family settled in the mountains of western North Carolina. Though there is no evidence that Plott ever came to western North Carolina, his son Henry settled there around 1801 to 1810 (as census discloses) and was responsible for the Plott Hound's later development.
Plott supposedly kept his strain entirely pure, making no outcrosses. In 1780, the Plott pack passed into the hands of Henry Plott.Shortly after, a hunter living in Rabun Gap, Georgia, who had been breeding his own outstanding strain of "leopard spotted dogs" heard of the fame of the Plott Hounds and came to North Carolina to see for himself. He was so impressed that he borrowed one of Montraville Plott's top stud dogs for a year to breed to his own bitches. This single cross is the only known instance of new blood being introduced into the Plott Hound since it first came to this country. Eventually Mont decided not to continue this breeding practice and gave all the leopard dogs away, returning to his original breeding practices.
Other crosses possibly took place around the year 1900. G.P. Ferguson, a neighbor of the Plott family in North Carolina in those days, was a major influence on the Plott breed. He made a careful study of the Blevins hounds and the Cable hounds of that era. The extent to which he used these bloodlines in his Plott breeding program is not known.
