
== Health ==


=== Autoimmune diseases ===
There are many autoimmune diseases that are known to sometimes occur in the Akita. These include, but are not limited to:

Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome, also known as Uveo-Dermatologic Syndrome is an auto-immune condition which affects the skin and eyes.
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, which is an autoimmune blood disorder.
Sebaceous adenitis is an autoimmune skin disorder believed to be of autosomal recessive inheritance.
Pemphigus foliaceus is an autoimmune skin disorder, believed to be genetic.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), or lupus, is a systemic autoimmune disease (or autoimmune connective tissue disease) that can affect any part of the body.


=== Immune-mediated endocrine diseases ===
In addition to these there are also the immune-mediated endocrine diseases with a heritable factor, such as:

Hypoadrenocorticism also known as Addison's disease, it affects the adrenal glands and is essentially the opposite to Cushing's syndrome.
Diabetes mellitus, also known as type 1 diabetes. It affects the pancreas.
Hypothyroidism, also known as autoimmune hypothyroidism. This is an autoimmune disease which affects the thyroid gland.


=== Non-immune specific conditions ===
Other non-immune specific conditions known to have occurred in the Akita include:

Gastric dilation is also known as bloat; may progressive to gastric dilatation volvulus (GDV), in which the stomach twists on itself.
Microphthalmia, meaning "small eyes", is a developmental disorder of the eye, believed to be an autosomal recessive genetic condition.
Primary glaucoma, Increased pressure in the eye.
Progressive retinal atrophy progressive degeneration of the retina (portion of the eye that senses light and allows sight).
Hip dysplasia a skeletal condition where the head of the femur does not fit properly into the hip socket. Leads to osteoarthritis and pain.
Elbow dysplasia a skeletal condition in which the components of the elbow joint (the humerus, radius, and ulna) do not line up properly, leading to osteoarthritis and pain.
Von Willebrands disease, a genetic bleeding disorder caused by a deficiency in Von Willebrand factor.
Cushing’s Syndrome also known as hyperadrenocorticism, it affects the adrenal glands and is caused by long-term exposure to high levels of glucocorticosteroids, either manufactured by the body or given as medications.


=== Breed specific conditions ===
There are two breed specific conditions mentioned in veterinary literature:

Immune sensitivity to vaccines, drugs, insecticides, anesthetics and tranquilizers
Pseudohyperkalemia, a  rise in the amount of potassium that occurs due to its excessive leakage from red blood cells (RBCs) when blood is drawn. This can give a false indication of hyperkalemia on lab tests, hence the prefix pseudo, meaning false. This occurs because many eastern Asian breeds, including Akitas and Shiba Inus, have a higher level of potassium in their RBCs than other dogs.
