
== Characteristics ==

The Treeing Walker Coonhound should give an impression of a working dog. According to the UKC standard, it may stand 20 to 27 inches high at maturity, with weight in proportion. The common weight range is 50 to 70 pounds, with males being larger than females.The skull should be broad, with a long muzzle and long, hanging ears. Eyes are dark and have a soft expression. All four legs should be straight when viewed from the front or back, with cat-like, compact feet. In conformation shows, blindness or deafness is a disqualification. 
The smooth coat is fine and glossy and comes in a tricolor and a bi-color pattern. Tricolor, white with black and tan markings, is preferred, although bicolor dogs, black and white or tan and white, are acceptable.The Treeing Walker Coonhound has a clear bay on trail, which should change to a distinct "chop" when treed. Its temperament should be kind but fearless and courageous on the hunt.
The Treeing Walker Coonhound is bred primarily for mouth, looks, and ability. It is first and foremost a hunting dog, although it may be kept as a pet. It is described as affectionate and good with children, but its energy requires an outlet and it must be trained.
The Treeing Walker Coonhound lives an average of 12 to 13 years. 


=== Temperament ===
Treeing Walker Coonhounds are loving, intelligent, confident, and enjoy interacting with humans. They make good companion dogs for an owner who understands the characteristics of the breed and is willing to work with their in-bred nature as a hunting dog. On the scent, they are tireless, alert, and intense. At home they are mellow, sensitive lovers of comfort: they adore having their heads in the laps of their masters and being petted and fed treats.  A Treeing Walker Coonhound is happiest living indoors with his family with a nice soft place to snooze on the couch, a master that appreciates the dog's loud joyful barking when master returns home, and a firm hand that insists he is not permitted to steal snacks off the table because this breed has a very powerful sense of smell that makes Christmas buffets seductive and irresistable without obedience training. 
Treeing Walker Coonhounds get along well with other dogs and with children. Like most hounds, they are even-tempered and difficult to annoy or drive into aggression towards people or fellow dogs. With training they will coexist with small animals such as cats, despite their nature as a small-game hunter.
