
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===

 There are two small types of the Formosan Mountain Dog; one is about 40 centimetres (16 in) tall at the shoulder, and the other is around 30 centimetres (12 in). However, the latter one was not found during the research conducted by Dr. Sung Yung-yi (宋永義) in 1976. The medium type of the Formosan Mountain Dog has a shoulder height under 50 centimetres (20 in), with a firm and fit body, slim waist, big chest, and half-covered ears. The most common type of these three in recent years is the medium-sized dog. Its color can range from black to earthy yellow or yellowish brown, and the nose is black. Black coating on the tongue is one of the most distinguished traits of the Formosan Mountain Dog.Dr. Sung of National Taiwan University and Mr. Ming Jie, Xu of Formosan Dog & Guard Dogs Breeding Center (台灣犬護衛犬繁殖中心) described a typical Formosan as having almond eyes, firm jaw strength, black coating on the tongue, a triangular face, thin prick ears, and a sickle tail. The tail is upright or curved with a thick fur coat, but the belly is hairless; the tail is used to warm the belly, and may even be long enough to protect the snout from insects. The dog is also well known for being well-balanced.


=== Movement ===
Formosan dogs are particularly agile; they are known for their hopping skill, especially when they are hunting small animals, such as rats. When they are startled or trying to intimidate their target, they will hop sideways back and forth. Unlike Rottweilers and German Shepherds, Formosan dogs do not hold their bite on their target. This habit is adopted and may be traced back to early boar hunting. Taiwanese aborigines used 5-6 Formosan dogs to circle a wild boar, and each dog would work to wound the boar. They would release their bite once they had attacked it and wait for the next attack again and again until the boar was exhausted enough for their master to move in for the final kill.


=== Temperament and behaviour ===
The Formosan is a high energy, loyal, affectionate, and intelligent breed that learns very quickly.  In unfamiliar situations, they tend to be wary of strangers and sounds, and they can become fear-aggressive. In new situations where the dog is fear-aggressive, it can take a few days before the dog will calm down.
If comfortable and well-trained, the Formosan will be friendly to people and other animals, though they tend to be a bit aloof or suspicious of strangers once they have bonded with their owner.  Once bonded, they are extremely loyal and affectionate to their owners.
Due to the breed's alertness, these dogs can make good guard dogs; if not well-trained, the Formosan can become overly protective and aggressive toward strangers.


==== Standard ====

Proportions
Depth of chest:height at withers = 4.5:10 to 4.7:10
Height at withers:length of body =  10:10.5, bitches can be slightly longer.
Length of muzzle:length of skull = 4.5:5.5.
Size & weight
Height: Dogs: 48–52 cm (19–20 in)    Bitches: 43–47 cm (17–19 in)
Weight: Dogs: 14 to 18 kg (31 to 40 lb)    Bitches: 12 to 16 kg (26 to 35 lb)
Head
Cranial Region:
Forehead: Broad and roundish, without wrinkles.
Skull: The skull is slightly longer than the muzzle.
Stop: Well defined with a slight furrow.
Facial Region :
Nose: Moderate size.  Wide nostrils.  Black in color, but can be slightly lighter in all colors except for the ones with black fur.
Muzzle: Flat nasal bridge.  Tight lips, without flews.  The muzzle tapers a little from the base to the nose, but it is not pointed at the tip.
Jaws/teeth: Jaws are strong.  Scissors bite, teeth are set square to the jaws.
Cheeks: Well developed and slightly protruding.
Eyes: Almond in shape.  Dark brown in colour.  Brown is also acceptable, but yellow or light eyes should be avoided.
Ears: Pricked, set on sides of the skull at an angle of 45 degrees. Inside of the outline is straight, while outside of the outline is slightly rounded.
Neck: Muscular, strong, good length, slightly arched.  Without dewlap.
Body:
General: Sinewy and muscular, nearly square in shape.
Back: Straight and short.  Withers well developed.
Loin: Firmly muscled.
Croup: Broad. Flat or very slightly sloping and short.
Chest: Fairly deep yet not reaching the elbow.  Forechest slightly protruding.  Ribs are well sprung.
Belly: Well tucked up.
Tail: In the shape of a sickle, set on high, carried erect, active, with the tip curving forward.
Limbs:
Forequarters:
Shoulders: Well muscled.  Shoulder blades are laid back.  They should meet the upper arms at an angle of 105-110 degrees.
Elbows: Close to the body.
Forearms: Straight and parallel to each other.
Metacarpus (Pasterns): Firm.
Hindquarters: Hindlegs should be slender, with good bone, well muscled and parallel to each other.  The rear angulation should be in balance to the front.
Upper thighs:  Broad, sloping and well bent at the stifle.
Lower thighs: Should be in balance with upper thighs.
Metatarsus (Rear pastern): Perpendicular to the ground.
Feet turning neither in nor out.  Pads are firm and thick.  Nails are black in colour, but lighter colors are acceptable in all colors except for those with black coats.
Gait/movement: Powerful gait with reaching stride.  Agile enough to easily turn 180 degrees quickly.
Coat/hair: Short and hard, lying tight to the body.  Length is between 1.5 and 3 cm (0.6 and 1.2 in).
Color: Black, brindle, fawn, white, white and black, white and fawn, white and brindle.
