
== Breed standard ==
General appearance: Typical "howling" dog with long ears and tail; passionate hunters, rustic of medium size and rectangular proportions.  Coat is short and comes in a variation of colours.Cranial region: Head shape is harmonious and in proportion to the body.  Cranial planes somewhat divergent.  Skull can be slightly longer than muzzle.  Seen from the front the skull is slightly domed.  A prominent occiput is highly desirable.Stop: A moderate stop is present.Nose: Large, well-developed, ample nostrils.  Either black or Brown.Muzzle: Medium length, slightly shorter than the skull, straight.  Seen from above it is rectangular.Lips: The flews should not be thick nor hanging.  Upper lip covers the lower one.Bite: Scissor bite preferred but even bite acceptable.  Complete dentition.Cheeks: Flats.Eyes: Almond-shaped with a sweet expression.Ears: Long, broad, hanging from a medium set (neither high nor low).  When pulled forward they should reach at least to the nose and have a rounded tip.Neck: Strong or moderate length set well into shoulders forming a slightly arched shape.  Some loose skin on the underside of the neck not to be penalized.Body: Rectangular and of  medium build.Topline: Topline slopes gently from the withers to the croup which is slightly higher.Withers: The  withers should be well defined.Loin: Strong and sloping slightly upwards towards the croup.  Quarters (flanks) should be short.Croup: Average length with a tendency to be higher than the withers.Chest: Moderately wide with a noticeable prow.  Should descend to the elbows.  Ribs moderately arched and extending well back.Underline: Defined tuck up.Tail: Very long, thin and tapering towards the end.  No brush should be present.Forequarters: Well muscled with good strong bone.Shoulders: Well angulated with the scapula being slightly longer than the humerus.Forelegs: Of medium length with strong bone.Carpus (wrist): Angulated.Feet: Medium-sized, tough with resistant nails and pads.Rear quarters: Strong, well angulated, muscular.  Hocks should not be too long.Rear feet: Same as fore feet.Movement: Agile, smooth and effortless.  When moving the tail is either on a level with the back or carried well up.Skin: Of fine texture and elastic.
