
== Appearance ==

In Brazil the breed has two current standards imposed by two distinct clubs, the CBKC and the CAFIB. Consequently the stock of each club has visible morphological differences. The CAFIB standard was constructed based on the ancient phenotype of the breed. But the current standard of the CBKC / FCI is the best known internationally.The Fila Brasileiro has Bloodhound ancestry that is evident in its long muzzle and pendulous skin. It is a Molosser breed with large bones and loose skin. The breed standard requires males to be between 65 and 75 cm (25.5 inches to 29.5 inches) high at the withers and weigh 50 to 82 kilograms (110 to 181 lb). Females are slightly smaller and are expected to be 60 to 70 cm (23.5 inches to 27.5 inches) high at the withers and weigh at least 41 kg (90 lbs).  They have a rectangular build and though they are massive, their natural agility is apparent. The head is big and heavy with a deep muzzle.  The ears are large, thick, tapered and either droop or fold back exposing the interior, depending on mood.  Neck and back are well muscled, the chest is broad and deep.  Unlike the vast majority of canines, the croup is higher than the withers.  Legs are heavily boned. The skin is very distinctive of the breed as it is thick and loose all over the body, mainly in the region around the neck. The thick skin forms pronounced dewlaps. In many individuals, the dewlaps proceed to the chest and abdomen. Some dogs show a fold at the side of the head and also at the withers descending to the shoulders. The coat is short and dense and the texture is normally smooth and soft. Their colours vary from solid, brindle, mouse grey, patched, dappled or black and tan. They are almost never white. Typical colours are fawn, black and brindle. Brindles of a basic color may have the stripes of either less or with very strong intensity. Sometimes a black mask is present. The CAFIB standard does not accept black, mouse grey, dappled, or black-and-tan coats as it considers as a sign of mix, on the other hand it accepts dogs with large white markings on any part of the body.Though large in size, the Fila does not appear static.  Rather it is harmonious, cat-like and above all powerful.  The Fila appears self-assured and calm but is never absent in expression.   When at attention, the gaze of the Fila Brasileiro is firm, alert and unwavering. Another typical characteristic of the breed is its gait, which is similar to that of a camel, moving two legs of one side at a time. The gait gives it a typical rolling lateral movement on the throat and the hindquarters which is accentuated when the dog's tail is raised. The head is typically lower than the backline. The characteristic carriage and gait has earned it great success in dog shows.
