
== Famous Cairns ==

Terry, the dog that played Toto in the 1939 screen adaptation of The Wizard of Oz, was a brindle Cairn terrier. Due to the identification of the State of Kansas with the original story The Wonderful Wizard of Oz, a resident of Wichita has begun a drive to make the Cairn terrier the official dog of Kansas. Terry also had a role in the Shirley Temple film Bright Eyes, and 12 other films.


=== In media ===
In I Love Lucy,  Little Ricky had a Cairn terrier named Fred.
J. Edgar Hoover notably bred Cairn terriers and gifted them to high ranking government officials during his career.
UK TV presenter Paul O'Grady often features a Cairn terrier called Olga on his primetime chat show; dark in colour, Olga is a rescue dog.
Also in the UK, Pauline Fowler actress Wendy Richard in the BBC TV show EastEnders had a Cairn she fondly named Betty.  Betty made an appearance as Toto on BBC's "Strictly Come Dancing" (series 10) after Vincent Simone and his celebrity partner Dani Harmer danced a waltz to "Over the Rainbow" from The Wizard of Oz.
George Lopez's family dog on the ABC TV series George Lopez, is a Cairn terrier named Mr. Needles, named by the son, Max, for the extremely high number of shots that the incredibly sick former stray received from the veterinarian.
Portrait of a Lady, Nicole Kidman, Cairn Terrier throughout movie 
Australian television soap series Neighbours had a Cairn terrier named Audrey which belonged to the character Libby Kennedy.
The character of Romulus, owned by Ray Milland's character, Steven Tolliver, in Cecil B. De Mille's epic Reap the Wild Wind (1942) was a Cairn terrier.
A few years later, in The Uninvited (1944), the Ray Milland character also had a Cairn terrier.
Thimble the dog was a brindle Cairn terrier played by Danvers. Thimble appeared once in episode five, season five of the British television drama Upstairs, Downstairs.
A wheaten Cairn Terrier named Kobe was featured in Dunston Checks In,  Lost And Found, and the opening scenes of Twister.
In USA Network's Mr. Robot, Rami Malek's character Elliot Alderson has a Cairn terrier named Flipper.
In the film Kingsman: The Secret Service, the character Harry Hart owned a Cairn terrier named Mr. Pickle. In the sequel Kingsman: The Golden Circle, Eggsy uses a similar Cairn terrier puppy to trigger Hart's memories after he suffered amnesia.


=== In books ===
In the Maximum Ride book series, Total, the talking dog, is a Cairn terrier.
In the first edition of L. Frank Baum's book The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1899), though Baum did not specify in the text what breed Toto was, illustrator W. W. Denslow drew him as a Cairn Terrier.
In Donald Barthelme’s short story "Chablis," the narrator says that his baby wants, according to his wife, a "Cairn Terrier."
