
== Portuguese Podengo Grande ==


=== Appearance ===
WIRE COATThe WPG is a large-sized type with a tough but even temperament and a rough coat that primarily functions as a briar-protectant when hunting wild boar.
The single coat (without undercoat) does shed but not very much.
Registered WPGs are very rare, even in its home country and is not yet available to export.

SMOOTH COATThe SPG is a large-sized type with a dense smooth single layer coat that also functions as a briar-protectant when hunting wild boar. The registered SPG is still rare in its home country, with very few individuals available for export.


=== Temperament ===
Both kinds of Podengo Grande are known to be tough, hardy and intelligently observant animals. They must be socialized very well and carefully by a primitive breed-experienced handler. They are used primarily for hunting wild boar in large packs, where they are released from kennel trucks and sent to chase the boar to its den. They then continue to harass it until it emerges in its attack mode. The dogs then jump in and attach to the boar from all angles and dispatch it swiftly. The waiting hunter can then retrieve the prey.
They will be good guardians and require a securely fenced yard (at least 6 ft tall). They enjoy digging dens, also, like their other Podengo relations. It is most closely related to the Podengo Medio, in fact, Podengo Medios which grow too tall for the Medio standard may be classified as Podengo Grandes.  This arrangement does not exist in any other way within the Podengo group. Training will be firm but fair with the Podengo Grande as it must have respect for its handler and be amenable to training.


=== History ===
The Portuguese Podengo Grande may have existed, unregistered, in North America with Portuguese-Americans in private home settings, where they have been used for deer and wild pig hunting. The first Podengo Grande was imported to the US in 2008 and the first litter born in 2009 as well as the import of 4 Grande of the wire coat. 2010 brought the second litter of Grande. Breeders in Portugal continue to breed primarily for hunting and the PG is kept and raised in kennels.
There is a unique system currently in place in Portugal where unregistered dogs (denoted by the kennel club of Portugal as R.I. or 'Initial Registration') may be evaluated by breed experts and used in a breeding program. Succeeding generations, also evaluated by said experts, may eventually result in a 3 generation pedigree of known, evaluated, 'R.I.' dogs which would thus create a full pedigree for certain formerly "RI" Podengos. This process is carried forth under rules established by the CPC and is not exportable to other countries as it relies on the presence of indigenous wild specimens of the breed.
In the United States the American Kennel Club (AKC) has determined that the Medio and Grande size together are to be called 'Portuguese Podengo' as one breed. It will be registered by the AKC in the Hound Group.


== References 