
== Registry ==


=== FCI ===
The Fédération Cynologique Internationale (FCI) is an overseeing entity for many international purebred dog breed registries, including the Dutch Kennel Club (Raad van Beheer). The FCI itself is not a registry and does not issue pedigrees, instead the FCI has 90 members and contract partners (one member per country) that each issue their own pedigrees and train their own judges.  The 'owner' countries of the breeds write the breed standards that are used as reference for judges at shows held in FCI member countries.  Some member countries have an open studbook by which dogs can be registered based on appearances and other FCI member countries have closed studbooks. The Dutch studbooks were closed on 1 February 1971. The goal of the FCI is, in part, ‘to protect the use, the keeping and the breeding of purebred dogs in the countries where the FCI has a member or a contract partner’.  The United States of America is not an FCI Member or Contract Partner.


=== The Dutch Shepherd in the United States ===
The kennel club of registry for the Dutch Shepherd in the United States is the United Kennel Club, having first published their breed standard on 1 January 1995.  Established in 1898, the United Kennel Club is the largest all-breed performance-dog registry in the world, registering dogs from all 50 US states and 25 foreign countries.  More than 60 percent of its nearly 16,000 annually licensed events are tests of hunting ability, training and instinct.  UKC registered Dutch Shepherds successfully compete in conformation, obedience, agility, rally, weight pull, nosework, dock jumping, lure coursing and previously in protection/police dog events through the now defunct Dog Sport program.  The Dutch Shepherd Dog Club of America (UKC Provisional National Breed Club) reveals the UKC reflects 1,499 permanently registered Dutch Shepherds in their archives, but indicates the number of active (under the age of 12) Dutch Shepherds total 1,091 dogs (as of 31 December 2017).As of 2012, the Dutch Shepherd is being recorded by the American Kennel Club in their Foundation Stock Service, accepting pedigrees from some FCI members as eligibility but declining membership to dogs with pedigrees from certain other FCI member countries.   FSS breeds are not eligible for AKC registration, however once individually registered under the FSS program, a Dutch Shepherd is able to compete in the AKC companion events of obedience, tracking, agility and rally. The American Dutch Shepherd Association states they maintain a listing of the dogs registered in the American Kennel Club’s FSS database and in 2017 reflected a total of 230 Dutch Shepherds registered in the USA and Canada.  The American Kennel Club board of directors voted their approval on 16 January 2016 of moving the Dutch Shepherd to the Miscellaneous Class effective 1 January 2017 and has designated the American Dutch Shepherd Association as the AKC Parent Club for the breed.
