
== Temperament ==
English Coonhounds require regular exercise to keep in prime condition, but are generally mellow when not on the prey's tail. English Coonhounds usually make good house pets. However, they have a high prey drive and will go after small animals unless time is taken to train them otherwise. Because of this, they are not usually recommended for households with small pets unless they have been raised around small animals. They are generally good with children and tend to be very loyal dogs that are eager to please their owners. Like most puppies, younger English Coonhounds can be quite inquisitive and destructive- therefore, obedience training early on is highly recommended, as is providing them with plenty of attention and exercise. As they are known to bark when caged, crate training from a young age is strongly recommended, as well.
Like all coonhounds, English are generally good natured and very sociable dogs. Skittishness or aggression is considered a defect, according to UKC breed standards. They are strong-willed, if not downright stubborn, and require more patience in training than other breeds. English Coonhounds are incessant nesters and should be avoided by people who do not wish to have dogs on their furniture. They make excellent family pets, as they have been bred to coexist amiably within a pack, as well as to be efficient hunters. English Coonhounds also make adequate watch dogs, as their vocalizations are characterized by melodious, drawn out bawls and short, explosive chops typical of Hound type dogs.


=== Hunting ===
The breed has proven popular with coon hunters and has a powerful nose which enables it to track both small and large game, including raccoons, cougars and bears. One of the types of hunting that the breed is used for treeing, where the dogs are used to force climbing animals up into trees, where they can be cornered and shot by hunters.While known for their ability in this type of hunting, they can lose their ability to pace themselves and, on occasion, stand their ground when they believe that they have chased their prey up a tree, even if they haven't. They can have a one track mind while hunting and tune everything else out, including commands. Against cougars and bears, they can keep the larger game in position until the hunters arrive. They have become a favored breed in coon hunting.
