
== Appearance ==

The Finnish Lapphund is a medium-sized, strongly-built dog.  It has a profuse coat with pricked, highly mobile ears, distinctive markings and an elegant nose.
Colours of black:cream,tan,white and gray.brown and white also brown and cream. There is also a pear black,white and gray
The breed standard is 46 to 52 centimetres (18 to 20 in) at the withers for a male, and a slightly smaller 41 to 47 centimetres (16 to 19 in) for a female.  However, some variation is allowed, since the breed standard states that the type is more important than the size.  A typical male of 49 cm height normally weighs 17 to 19 kilograms (37 to 42 lb), but the breed has a weight range of 15 to 24 kilograms (33 to 53 lb), depending on the size of the dog.
The Lapphund has a profuse double coat, with a short, fluffy undercoat and a longer topcoat. The coat makes the dog waterproof as well as resistant to extreme cold. In Finland, only two dog breeds are legally allowed to be kenneled outdoors in winter: the Finnish Lapphund and the Lapponian herder. The profuse hair around the head and neck gives the distinct impression of a mane in most males.  Although the coat is profuse, it requires only a modest amount of maintenance. Weekly brushing is recommended throughout the year, except during shedding seasons, where a daily brush may be required.
A wide variety of colors and markings are found in Finnish Lapphunds. Any colour is allowed in the breed standard, although a single colour should predominate. One of the most common colour combination's is black and tan: a predominantly black dog with tan legs and face. Common colourations may include crème, black, red, brown, sable and wolf-sable. In descending order of dominance, the following genes in certain series correspond to specific colourations:A series (Agouti):

Ay: dominant yellow or sable (which produces various types of red and sable)
aw: wolf sable or grizzle
as:saddle
at: black and tan
a: recessive blackB series (brown)
C series (colour):

C: CC pairing displays deep rich tan
Ce: not fully defined (potential lightening effect)
cch: Chincilla (lightens yellow to cream or faw)E series (extension)

Em: black mask
E: no black mask
Ebr: brindle
e: conversion/fading of black to yellowMany Finnish Lapphunds have very distinctive facial markings. One of the unusual facial markings is "spectacles", where a ring of lighter coloured hair around the eyes gives the impression that the dog is wearing spectacles. The spectacles of the Finnish Lapphund, while reminiscent of their cousins, the Keeshond, are larger and more pronounced. Like other spitz types, the tail is carried curving over the back. The Finnish Lapphund has a tail covered with thick, long hair. The tail may hang whilst the dog stands.

The Finnish Lapphund is a recognized breed in Finland, Europe, Great Britain, Australia and the United States.  The breed standards are mostly identical, with a few minor exceptions: in the English standard, the acceptance of tipped ears is omitted.
