
== History ==

The Koolie's ancestors were the smooth coated blue merle Collie (imported from Britain in the 19th century) and the Black and Tan Collie from the Highlands of Scotland; these were the same type imported by Thomas Hall for the creation of his Heelers. The Koolie is believed to be descended from the same Collie types that were brought to Australia for the kennels of Thomas S. Hall (an originator of the Australian Cattle Dog breed); some believe that they could be direct descendants of Hall's dogs. While some believe the 'German Coolie' to be descended from the 'German Tiger', a European herding dog, there is no genetic or even anecdotal evidence to support this claim. A more plausible theory is that these dogs were used by German immigrants in South Australia who, unable to correctly pronounce 'collie', referred to the dogs as 'coolies'. Others have noted strong similarities with the Australian Koolie and the Welsh Collie, another British herding subtype.
According to older Koolie breeders personal records, from diaries and photo albums the Koolie has been around for over 160 years. During the industrial era some bloodlines were influenced by Kelpie and Border Collie, as explained by one grazier in Western Australia, "You bred from the good workers which were around and Koolies were not always to be found, so you bred to the next best worker that was and this was either the Kelpie or Border depending on the region you lived and the stock you worked".
In 2000, the Koolie Club of Australia was formed to preserve, protect and ethically promote the Koolie breed. The Koolie Club does not actively work towards bench standard recognition, feeling this would only be detrimental to the breeds working future. As of (2013), no bench standard exists.
In 2004, the Koolie breed was recognised by the Australian Sporting Registrar, judges from the Australian National Kennel Council (ANKC) may judge Koolies in all ANKC sanctioned sporting trials. In the states of Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland, registered Koolies may compete in, herding, obedience, tracking, jumping, gambles and dog agility events through registration on their State's Sporting Register as members of the Koolie Club of Australia.

In May 2006, the Stockdog Committee of the Australian Shepherd Club of America voted to accept the "Koolie/German Coolie" into their list of recognised and accepted herding breeds, admission was granted June 2006.
In 2006, The American Herding Breed Association accepted the Australian Koolie onto their list of recognised and accepted breeds.


=== Exports ===
In 2002, the first exportation to America of a registered DNA tested Koolie were orchestrated by members of the Koolie Club of Australia, for Ms Torry Lynn Revels of North Carolina, USA.
In 2003, at the Koolie Club of Australia's Annual General meeting a unanimous vote was returned to appoint Ms Revels the clubs official representative in America, Ms Revels was instrumental in gaining acceptance of the Australian Koolie to the recognised breeds lists of the American Herding Breed Association and the Australian Shepherd Club of America in order to gain qualifying scores in herding trials.
In 2008, the first exportation to New Zealand of a registered DNA tested Koolie were orchestrated by members of the Koolie Club of Australia, for Ms Penny Nalders of Wellington, New Zealand.
In 2008, the first exportation to Finland of registered DNA tested Koolies were orchestrated by members of the Koolie Club of Australia, for Ms Sinikka Kumpusalmi of Vehmersalmi, and Mrs Satu Tasanen of Honkilahti, Finland.
In 2011, the first exportation to Switzerland of registered DNA tested Koolies were orchestrated by members of the Koolie Club of Australia, for Ms Brigitt Stirnimann of Aarwangen, Switzerland.
