
== Health ==
A relatively healthy breed with no current common health issues, the average life span of a Stabyhoun is 12-14 years. Diet, exercise, care and environment are currently the factors of greatest overall influence on the breed's health and lifespan. The Stabyhoun is a overall a healthy dog. Known congenital health conditions in the breed are Patent Ductus Arteriosis (PDA), Epilepsy, Elbow Dysplasia, Hip Dysplasia and Type 1 von Willebrands Disease (vWB). Other conditions recorded are Radius Curvus, Hereditary Cataracts, Steriod Responsive Meningitis-Arteritis (SRMA) and non-specific Cancer. The heritabilty of these conditions is uncertain, on  , but with careful breeding, most of these problems were eliminated. Epilepsy occurred in the past, but is no longer a common genetic inheritance.


=== Care ===
The Stabyhoun does not require special care apart from regular brushing to minimize tangling. The dogs moult (shed) twice a year, and thorough brushing helps the process of shedding. Without brushing, Stabyhoun hair can get tangled and matted in the manner of dreadlocks.  The hair behind the ears is particularly susceptible to tangling and matting. Washing with soap should be avoided when possible because soap strips the coat of its natural oils and shine. The Stabyhoun coat will naturally rid itself of dirt and mud. After a swim the dog is usually clean and dry in a matter of hours.


=== Breeding ===
Due to the limited size of the Stabyhoun population, careful breeding is essential. The Dutch Association for Stabyhouns and Wetterhouns (Nederlandse Vereniging voor Stabij- en Wetterhounen/NVSW), the Ameri-Can Stabyhoun Association and the UK Stabyhoun Association has breed advisors who assist with mating selections. In an effort to control inbreeding, the association keeps breeding at a minimum and carefully considers prospective matings. Despite there being small populations of Stabyhouns outside of the Netherlands, the breeding population is small and the greatest genetic diversity remains in the Netherlands. Since Stabyhouns are viewed as part of the Dutch national heritage, breeders keep puppy and dog prices affordable; Stabyhoun breeders are commonly hobby breeders as a result. The average Stabyhoun litter size is seven. Bitches are limited to delivering no more than 5 litters in their lifetime.
The bitch may only reproduce when she reaches a minimum age of 18 months, and cannot breed once she reaches the age of 9. At least one year should elapse between litters. The hips of prospective mating pair have to be x-rayed (not over FCI-C result), and the match between bitch and stud has to be approved by the Dutch Club's breeding committee. A stud must be 18 months of age or older to breed, and it must have with the same show and hip results as its female mate. Stud dogs should not sire more than three litters a year, and 10 in their lifetime. Stud-owners are expected to appear on breeders' days so that the dogs may be evaluated and paired with potentially suitable mates.
