
== In popular culture ==

Leo Tolstoy's 1869 novel War and Peace contains an extensive wolf hunting scene with borzois in book 7, chapters 3 to 6.
F. Scott Fitzgerald's second novel, The Beautiful and Damned (1922), contains a scene in which Gloria compares Anthony to a Russian wolfhound. Anthony decides to take this as a compliment: "Anthony remembered that they were white and always looked unnaturally hungry. But then they were usually photographed with dukes and princesses, so he was properly flattered."
George Bernard Shaw in his Everybody’s Political What’s What?(1944) wrote "The future of mankind belongs to its mongrels and not to its handsome but brainless Borzois."
Ivan, one of the protagonists of the historical novel by the Cuban writer Leonardo Padura Fuentes, El hombre que amaba a los perros (The Man Who Loved Dogs), is the editor of a university journal of veterinary medicine, who manages to make a living during the Special Period in Cuba by helping people take care of their dogs. The novel alludes to Ivan's own dogs as well as to borzoi dogs owned by Leon Trotsky and his assassin, Ramón Mercader.
A borzoi features prominently in a Music Hall revue in the short story Cousin Theresa by Saki (H.H.Munro).
In the book The Romanov Prophecy (2004) by Steve Berry
In the anime Kuroshitsuji (Japanese for Black Butler), Ciel Phantomhive as a child had a black borzoi named Sebastian. He named the demon with which he made a Faustian contract after this dog.
The 1968 film version War and Peace contains a hunting scene with borzois from the kennel of Ekhaga, Sweden.
Uncle Zeke starred as "Digger" in the 2000 Disney film, 102 Dalmatians
The borzoi brothers, Rocket, Missile, and Jet in Ginga Densetsu Weed
Boris in Walt Disney's 1955 film Lady and the Tramp
D'or's Prince Igor owned by Barbara Todd (Zcerlov) and bred by Andre Legere appears in the 1969 film, Hello Dolly!
When Katniss Everdeen and Peeta Mellark arrive at the Capitol in the 2012 film The Hunger Games, a pair of pink borzois are shown on screen—an illustration of the Capitol residents' gaudy lifestyle.
Borzois can also been seen in cameo roles in the films Love at First Bite, Legends of the Fall ("Notchee Boy"), Excalibur, All Dogs Go to Heaven (1989), Bride of Frankenstein, Easter Parade, Wolfen, Ziegfeld Follies, Onegin (1999), Gangs of New York (2002), Chaplin, The Avengers (TV series), JAG, Maverick (1994), Sleepy Hollow, Last Action Hero, and A Knights Tale (on the DVD deleted scenes).
"Mademoiselle Nobs" from Pink Floyd: Live at Pompeii (1971) who "sings" a song with the band.
Lyndell Ackerman's "Nessie" CH Windyglens Finesse in the TV show Wings.
In an SCTV parody commercial for fictional Poochare dog food, a borzoi dog is seen being taken for a walk by Eugene Levy.
In episode 2 of the first season of the anime Medaka Box, one of the requests for the student council is to find a missing puppy, which turns out to be a borzoi. It has grown quite large since it was lost. This also happens in the manga version.
A borzoi is one of the dogs to appear in the film Cats & Dogs. It is seen during the council session scene.
