
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===

The Bichon Frise is a small dog that weighs approximately 5–10 kg (10–20 lbs) and stands 23–30 cm (9–12 in) at the withers, but slightly larger dogs are not uncommon. The skull is slightly rounded and the muzzle is not pointy. The tail is groomed to be long and curly and is carried over the back. It has a black nose and dark round eyes; its white hair consists of a curly, dense coat with little shedding (much like a poodle in this respect), although many of the breed do tend to have less curly hair than others. A small amount of buff, cream, or apricot colour may be seen around its ears, snout, paws or body, but normally these colours do not exceed 10% of its body. FCI/AKC Standard coat colour is pure white; other colours such as apricot or grey are not recognised. A white coat is preferred in the show ring. The head and legs are proportionate in size to the body, and the ears and tail are natural (not docked or cropped). The coat is trimmed often to make the hair seem like an even length. Bichon Frises can have a medium-high intelligence.


=== Temperament ===
The American Kennel Club refers to the Bichon Frise as "merry" and "cheerful", and the breed standard calls for a dog that is "gentle mannered, sensitive, playful and affectionate." The dogs are generally very sociable and do well with an owner who takes them along on outings. They are affectionate and intelligent. Bichons do well with children because they are playful and have lots of energy. If affiliated with a particular territory and encouraged by owners, they can become very territorial. Developed as a companion-dog breed, the Bichon Frise tends to get along well with both children and other animals. Bichon Frises are very obedient if training is started early and continued constantly.
Though not considered a retriever or a water dog by modern standards, the bichon type, due to their ancestry as sailors' dogs, have an affinity for water and enjoy retrieving. On the boats however, the animals' role was that of companion dog.


=== Training ===
Bichon Frises are easily trained. Training must be done with a gentle, but firm hand; however, you should not scold or use harsh corrections. They respond well to being trained with being provided with treats after accomplishing a lesson. 
These playful pups are very sociable, but, if they are not properly trained, they can become too active. The Bichon Frise Club of America recommends against purchasing this dog from a pet shop and to instead adopt from a pound.


=== Allergies and Frequent Problems to be aware of ===
Bichon Frises require more than average owner or professional coat grooming, multiple times per week to daily. The coat is combed to remove loose hair, mats, and tangles. Bichon Frises may need more detailed owner or professional grooming approximately every four to eight weeks. Daily brushing of the coat can help to prevent matting. If a Bichon's coat gets severely matted, they may develop a haematoma, most likely in the ears. Bichon Frise are more prone than average to ear infections. As Bichon Frises are white dogs, frequent bathing is required to maintain the colour.
Bichon Frises are prone to scratching and chewing on themselves in the summer because of the warm and moist air, which commonly results in serious skin conditions. They are comparatively hypoallergenic, but they themselves suffer from allergies to fleas, tics, chemicals, pollen, dust, etc. Loose knee joints, ear infections, cataracts, diabetes, and heart disease are also common.


=== Hypoallergenic qualities and shedding ===
Bichon Frises often appear on lists of dogs that do not shed (moult). The grooming required to maintain the Bichon Frise's coat helps remove loose hair, and the curl in the coat helps prevent dead hair and dander from escaping into the environment, as with the poodle's coat. The frequent trimming, brushing, and bathing required to keep the Bichon looking its best removes hair and dander and controls the other potent allergen, saliva.Bichon Frises are considered suitable for people with allergies,
as they are bred to be hypoallergenic. It is important to note that human sensitivity to dog fur, dander, and saliva varies considerably. Although hair, dander, and saliva can be minimised, they are still present and can stick to "clothes and the carpets and furnishings in your home"; inhaling the allergens, or being licked by the dog, can trigger a reaction in a sensitive person.


=== Lifespan ===
Bichon Frise in the UK and in the United States in Canada (according to surveys of their owners) had an average life span of about 12–13 years or older, with Bichon Frises in the UK tending to live longer than Bichon Frises in North America, though the record age was lower in the UK. This breed's longevity is similar to other breeds of its size, and somewhat longer than purebred dogs in general.The longest-lived of 34 deceased Bichons in a 2004 UK survey died at 16.5 years. The oldest Bichon Frises for which there are reliable records in various North American surveys have died at 19 years.In a 2004 UK Kennel Club survey, the leading causes of Bichon Frise death were old age (23.5%) and cancer (21%). In a 2007 US/Canadian breeders survey, the leading causes of death were cancer (22%), unknown causes (14%), hematologic (11%), and old age (10%). Hematologic causes of death were divided between autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (ITP). AIHA and ITP were responsible for the greatest number of Bichon Frise "years lost" (a measure of the extent to which a condition kills members of a breed prematurely). While cancer is a more common cause of death than AIHA and ITP, Bichon Frises that died of cancer died at a median age of 12.5 years. Hematologic deaths occurred at a median age of only 5 years. Bichon Frises in the UK survey had a lower rate of hematologic deaths (3%) than in the USA/Canada survey (11%).Bichons are also prone to liver shunts. These often go undetected until later in life, leading to complications that cannot be addressed, and therefore liver failure. Bichons who are underweight, runts of the litter, or have negative reactions to foods high in protein are more likely to be suffering from a shunt. When detected early, shunt often can be corrected through surgery. However, the later in life the shunt is detected, the lower the likelihood of surgery being successful. Shunts can be kept under control through special low-protein diets and through medications to support liver function, help flush toxins that build up in the kidneys and liver, and control seizures that often occur as a symptom of the shunt. Without surgery, Bichons with shunts on average live to be 4–6 years old. Other symptoms include dark urine, lethargy, loss of appetite, and increased thirst. Seizures come in all forms; episodes of seizures can begin early in life but may go undetected. Early seizures can appear to be the Bichon in a hypnotic state or an episode of vertigo, or being drunk. Shunts are a serious condition of smaller breeds, though so frequently associated with Bichons.


=== AIHA and ITP ===
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA, also called immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, or IMHA) and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (ITP) are responsible for many premature Bichon Frise deaths. These diseases can strike with little or no warning and kill very quickly. In AIHA, the dog's immune system attacks its own red blood cells, leading to severe, life-threatening anemia. Symptoms include weakness, loss of energy, lack of appetite, vomiting, diarrhea, rapid heart rate, rapid breathing, dark urine, and pale or yellow gums.ITP often accompanies AIHA. In ITP, blood platelets (which cause blood clotting) are destroyed. The most common clinical signs are haemorrhages of the skin and mucus membranes.  Mortality rates of 20% to 80% are reported.
