
== History ==
The Black Mouth Curs, as a breed, have varied historical documentation dependent upon region. Among them are the Southern Black Mouth Cur from Alabama, Foundation Black Mouth Cur from Texas, Ladner Yellow Black Mouth Cur from Mississippi, and the Florida Black Mouth Cur, sometimes called a cracker cur.The first Black Mouth Curs registered with a national kennel registry were the Ladner Black Mouth Curs through the National Kennel Club in April 1964. Mr L.H. Ladner had such extensive written documentation of his family's breeding curs that the NKC recognized their dogs as a breed.The Texas Black Mouth Cur comes from a line of curs well-documented in the book Big Thicket Legacy.  They are used primarily for herding cattle. 
The Florida Black Mouth Cur, used for herding cattle, are featured in old paintings hanging in local barber shops and homes, so their existence and history in Florida is documented.The Southern Black Mouth Cur, is believed to have originated in Alabama, though there are Southern Black Mouth Cur in Florida and Tennessee. The Howard Line of Southern Black Mouth Curs were the first registered Line of Black Mouth Curs, with a legitimate, and well documented outside source. They were registered with the courthouse around Howardtown, Alabama about 40 miles north of Mobile and nearby Tibbie in the early 1940s. These dogs were bred for well over 100 years prior to registration with the courthouse. They were used as multipurpose pioneer dogs that would hunt, protect the home, and gather in the cattle and pigs at slaughter time. Several breeders through the South continue to work toward retaining and improving the Southern Black Mouth  Cur. Through the efforts of several Black Mouth Cur breeders, the United Kennel Club later recognized the breed. Some of the first dogs originate with the Howard family. Mr. JD Howard can be found as being a descendant of Howardtown, and the Southern Black Mouth Cur heritage. Mr. JD Howard carried on the long family tradition for many years. His legacy is being continued by family member Mr. Steve Howard, who is still actively improving and breeding the Southern Black Mouth Cur.
