
== Temperament ==
This breed is active, alert and lively.  They need one or two long walks each day and will be fairly inactive indoors.  This breed will not adapt well to a strictly kenneled living situation; they need a balance of outdoor exercise and indoor play time with the family.Finnish Spitzes are considered to interact well with people and they are especially good with children.  They are always ready to play with children but if ignored, they will usually walk away.  As with all dogs, young children and dogs should always be supervised when together. It is an independent breed and will be attached to its family while remaining aloof with strangers.  The Finnish Spitz tends to be protective; males have more domineering traits than females.
Most Finnish Spitzes get along well with other dogs in the house.  They are bred as a hunting dog and thus are unreliable around small animals and pet birds, but on an individual basis may live well with cats, especially if they're raised with them.


=== Barking ===
The breed barks at anything perceived to be out of the ordinary. Barking is a major part of their hunting activities.  In Finland, these dogs are prized for their barking abilities, which can range from short, sharp barks to many barks per minute that sound like a yodel. The Finnish Spitz can bark as many as 160 times per minute.  In Scandinavia, a competition is held to find the "King of the Barkers."  In Finland, their barking ability in the field must be proven before a conformation championship can be earned.When used as a hunting companion, the barking is a way to signal the hunter that the dog has located prey in the forest.  They can be trained to reduce the amount of barking, although the barking does make them superb watchdogs.


=== Training ===
Finnish Spitzes are independent, strong-willed, intelligent dogs.  They are best trained with a soft voice and touch. This breed will not respond well to harsh training methods. They should be trained with a light touch and positive reinforcement methods.  With patience and calm yet firm handling, the Finnish Spitz can be a wonderful companion.
