
== History ==

In 2018, a genetic study found that just prior to 1859 a broadly distributed European herding dog had given rise to the German Shepherd, the French Berger Picard, and the five Italian herding breeds: Bergamasco Shepherd, Cane Paratore, Lupino del Gigante, Pastore d'Oropa, and the it:Cane da pastore della Lessinia e del Lagorai.Thought to be the oldest of the French Sheepdogs, the Berger Picard was brought to northern France and the Pas de Calais, in the 9th century by the Franks.Some experts insist that this breed is related to the more well-known Briard and Beauceron, while others believe it shares a common origin with Dutch and Belgian Shepherds. Although the Berger Picard made an appearance at the first French dog show in 1863, the breed's rustic appearance did not lead to popularity as a show dog.The breeding stock of the Berger Picard, was decimated by the ravages of World War I and World War II. With its population concentrated on the farms of north-eastern France, trench warfare in the Somme reduced the breed to near extinction.The Picard's easy care and mellow, yet mischievous, temperament have started the breed back on the road to recovery. Nevertheless, its numbers are still limited, even in its native country. As mentioned previously, today in France there are approximately 3500 dogs and in Germany approximately 500 of this breed. At present there are approximately 400 Berger Picards in the United States and Canada.
In December 2006, the Berger Picard Club of America was formed to protect and promote the breed in the United States. The Berger Picard has been recorded in the Foundation Stock Service of the American Kennel Club since April 2007. On October 12, 2011, the American Kennel Club chose the Berger Picard Club of America as the official parent club, as the breed moves towards full recognition. At the February 2012 Meeting of the American Kennel Club Board of Directors, the Board voted to move the Berger Picard into the Miscellaneous Group effective January 1, 2013. At the April 22, 2014, The AKC Board voted to approve a request from the Berger Picard Club of America to approve the breed standard submitted as the official breed standard for the Berger Picard breed, move the Berger Picard from the Foundation Stock Service into the Stud Book of the American Kennel Club on June 1, 2015, and approve the Berger Picard to compete in the Herding Group, effective July 1, 2015.The Berger Picard is a recognized breed by the Canadian Kennel Club.  It is in the Herding Group, Group 7.  The Standard for this breed is available through the Canadian Kennel Club, Group 7 breed standards. The national breed club is Berger Picard Club Canada.The interim breed standard for the Picardy Sheepdog was approved and the breed was accepted on to the import register of the United Kingdom's Kennel Club on the 1st April 2014. The breed can only be shown in Import classes at present and currently awaiting official registration of the breed club the Picardy Sheepdog club (proposed).  The Picard was first shown at Crufts in March 2016 in the Pastoral (Herding) Group.
