
== History ==
The origin of this mountain dog conjoins the history of all the Iberian mastiffs, and its evolution is linked to the transhumance route on the Iberian Peninsula. In ancient times this molossus dog stood in the high regions of Portugal, in particular in Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro Province. The breed is used to improve pastoralism by developing it as a livestock guardian dog, particularly against Iberian wolf attacks, that are always prolific in the area.  The breed has evolved over time with improved genetics through selective breeding for the conditions of pastoral farming.  It is thought to have roots with the Tibetan Mastiff. It is an offshoot to the Rafeiro do Alentejo, the southern Portuguese cattle dog, which "for many centuries" would follow the cattle herd in their migrations within the country.  As those migrations were curtailed, the two breeds diverged.  The breed also shares "some similarities with the short-haired Estrela Mountain Dog."In the mountains of Portugal, which are characterized by steep fields of pastures and difficult road access, this breed has adapted to the conditions of the region and the type of cattle, sheep and goats that have traditionally grazed in these areas.Until the second half of the twentieth century, the region was primarily pastoral. This changed when the government of Portugal encouraged land clearance so that grain could be grown.  However, many of those areas have returned to their previous use as pasture.This Portuguese breed continues to guard extensive sheep flocks in the region, and more than 95% of them are so employed.  As of 1995 the breed was exclusive to Portugal, with no known exports to other countries, and was rarely seen outside of the northern Iberian peninsula.  The breed has been imported to the State of Oregon, US as participants in an experiment to document the introduction and effect of "bigger" and "bolder" breeds – than so-called 'white dogs'; that is, the Great Pyrenees, Akbash and Maremma Sheepdog – as a deterrent to wolf predation.  This occurred in large part because of the reintroduction of wolves to northeast Oregon. Since their return in 2008 through 2014, Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife documented "86 fatal wolf attacks on livestock."  A similar experiment with cattle herds was conducted by the USDA in Montana.
