
== History ==
Sources have widely conflicting stories about the origins of this breed. According to one, the earliest Harrier types were crossed with Bloodhounds, the Talbot Hound, and even the Basset Hound. According to another, the breed was probably developed from crosses of the English Foxhound with Fox Terrier and Greyhound. And yet another, the Harrier is said to be simply a bred-down version of the English Foxhound. The first Harrier pack in England was established by Sir Elias de Midhope in 1260 and spread out as a hunting dog throughout the west of England and into Wales. Although there are many working Harriers in England, the breed is still not recognised in that country.
In any case, today's Harrier is between the Beagle and English Foxhound in size and was developed primarily to hunt hares, though the breed has also been used in fox hunting. The name, Harrier, reveals the breed's specialty. The Harrier has a long history of popularity as a working pack dog in England.
The Harrier is the most commonly used hound by hunts in Ireland, with  166 harrier packs, 37 of them mounted packs and 129 of them foot packs, spread throughout the country. More commonly in Ireland it is used to hunt both foxes and hares, with some packs hunting mainly foxes.
This breed of dog is recognized in 1885 by the American Kennel Club and is classified in the Hound Group.The Harrier Club of America cites the earliest description of a Harrier in "The Chace" by William Somervile which was written in 1735.
See there with count'nance blithe,And with a courtly grin, the fawning houndSalutes thee cow'ring, his wide op'ning noseUpward he curls, and his large sloe-black eyesMelt in soft blandishments and humble joy;His glossy skin, or yellow-pied, or blue,In lights or shades by Nature's pencil drawn,Reflects the various tints; his ears and legs,Fleckt here and there, in gay enamel'd pride,Rival the speckled pard; his rush-grown tailO'er his broad back bends in an ample arch;On shoulders clean, upright and firm he stands;His round cat-foot, straight hams, and wide-spread thighs,And his low-dropping chest, confess his speed,Or far extended plain; in ev'ry partSo well proportion'd, that the nicer skillOf Phidas himself can't blame thy choice.
