
== Strains ==
The APBT has several strains/bloodlines, many originated in dog fighting, and others developed for the conformation shows of the UKC. But at least two strains can be mentioned among some of the most important strains.


=== Colby pit bulls ===

The Colby dogs are an ancient black-nosed bloodline that served as one of the pillars of the APBT breed. Considered one of the most important strains, and one of the most famous, the Colby dogs were started by John P. Colby in 1889, who acquired the best fighting dogs (Bull and Terriers) imported from Ireland and England.
One of the most famous dogs of this bloodline was Colby's Pincher. Pincher was known as an invincible fighting dog, was widely used as a stud dog and for this reason Pincher is present in pedigree of the vast majority of APBT specimens.
Today, the Colby dogs strain remains preserved by the family of John P. Colby. 


=== Old Family Red Nose ===
Old Family Red Nose (OFRN) is an old strain or a family of bloodlines originating in Ireland, and known for their specific and unique reddish coloration. A dog of the OFRN strain has a copper-red nose and coat, red lips, red toe nails, and red or amber eyes. But not every American Pit Bull Terrier with these characteristics is necessarily an OFRN, since for this the dog must have a high percentage of the bloodlines of this family in its genealogy.


==== OFRN history ====
In the middle of the 19th century, there was a strain of pit dogs in Ireland that were known as "Old Family." At that time, all the bloodlines were closely inbred with each family clan. Since red is recessive to all colors but white, the strain was known as "Irish Old Family Reds." When the dogs began coming to America, they were already showing the red nose.The "Old Family Reds" dogs found their way to America  in the 19th century mainly via Irish immigrants though many in the United States did import the breed.Many strains have been crossed with the Old Family Reds at some time in their existence.  Consequently, nearly any strain will occasionally throw a red-nosed pup. This means that not every red-nose dog is a true OFRN. The Old Family Reds produced more than their share of good ones unlike other strains are known. Old Family Reds were sought after for their high percentage in ability to produce deep gameness. The strain in its purest form continues to be preserved by remaining breeders specializing in this bloodline.
It was once renowned for its gameness, but now it is bred to maintain its unique reddish color. Some of the most reputable breeders of the past, such as Lightner, McClintock, Hemphill, Williams, Menefee, Norrod and Wallace have contributed to the preservation and development of the strain. Finally, as McNolty said in his 30-30 Journal (1967) "Regardless of one's historical perspective, these old amber-eyed, red-nosed, red-toe-nailed, red-coated dogs represent some of the most significant pit bull history and tradition that stands on four legs today."
