
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===

Pumis can be in varying shades of grey, white, or fawn (known as 'fako' in Hungary).  Grey Pumis are the most common, born black, and ranging from almost black to light grey in adulthood.  Puppies usually start greying at six to eight weeks old and the shade progressively lightens. The final shade is predicted by the colour of the parents. Other accepted colours are black, white, and cream to red with a darker mask, known as fawn with mask.  An analysis of 1023 Pumi puppies carried out in 2009 by the University of Debrecen found that 56% were born black turning grey, 14% were black, 13% white, 11% grey, and 4% are fawn-coloured. Brown, mottled or blue-merle-coloured puppies are born occasionally.The thick coat is curly and of medium length approximately 4-7 cm (1.5-3 inches) long and consisting of a harsh topcoat and soft undercoat, which provides good insulation and enables the dog to tolerate extremes of weather. The coat is maintained by combing every few weeks, and trimming every two to four months. The coat grows constantly (similar to that of the Poodle) and, if grooming is not maintained, it may start matting. The breed has little to no shedding. The Pumi is known for its alert and lively ears, which are high-set and carried semi-erect and with longer hair than the body.The Pumi is a square, light-bodied dog which looks somewhat larger because of its thick coat with a long, narrow head. The muzzle is 45% of the length of the head, which is of equal length to the neck. The stop is barely noticeable, and the skull is flat when seen from the side. The eyes are small, dark, and slightly oblique. Movements are lively and energetic as is the Pumi itself.Male Pumis stand 41 to 47 cm (16 to 19 in) at the withers and weigh 10 to 15 kg (22 to 33 lb); bitches are 38 to 44 cm (15 to 17 in) and weigh 8 to 13 kg (18 to 29 lb).


=== Temperament ===

The Pumi is lively, expressive, bold, a little suspicious of strangers, but never aggressive or overly shy, somewhat vocal and always ready for action. They can be very protective of their own families. Early socialisation is important.Pumis are intelligent and bark easily, but are easy to train. With the intelligence of a herding dog and the alertness of a terrier, this breed needs to be kept busy, for example with herding, agility and obedience training, flyball, jogging, or playing fetch. Pumis are good with children and other animals, as long as they are trained from an early age.  It retains a playful temperament into adulthood and this, together with its tufted ears, gives its Hungarian nickname, "the clown".A well-socialised Pumi with mental stimulation and physical activity should not have behavioural problems, but there are some natural behaviours that might become a problem if not managed properly include digging, barking, and a tendency to try to herd people. The Pumi was bred as a herding dog and it is still so used today working close to and driving livestock with its rapid movement, barking, and the occasional nip. It has  also acted as a guard dog barking at any strange person or animal. Consequently, it can be a vocal breed and dogs that are not engaged in farm work should be discouraged from barking unnecessarily.
