
== Appearance ==

The Akbash is a large dog, weighing from 75 to 140 pounds (34 to 64 kg), averaging 90 pounds for the female, and 120 pounds for the male. Akbash dogs range from about 27 to 32 inches (69 to 81 cm) tall. The Akbash tends to be leaner than other Turkish livestock guardian dog breeds (Kangal and Anatolian Shepherd), and some Akbash dogs may also be taller.
The Akbash has a smooth-short to medium-full white double coat (sometimes with light biscuit coloring at the ears). The dogs have long legs, a tail that curls and is frequently feathered, and pink skin blotched with black or blackish-brown under the white coat. Eye rims, nose and lips should be completely black or blackish-brown, but they may also be lighter, especially during cold winter months.
Akbash Dog genetics may derive from a combination of molosser and sighthound breeds since they possess characteristics of both types. Although there is a great deal of variation in size and height of individuals, Akbash Dogs have a reputation for being tall with long, strong, flexible bodies. They have loose skin around their necks to help protect them from predators during fights. Heads can range from medium to heavy, though medium is preferred. Purebred Akbash Dogs may or may not be born with rear double dewclaws. Lack of, or possession of rear double dewclaws in an Akbash is no indication of recent interbreeding with other livestock guardian breeds nor any other breeds.
Some people suggest that the Akbash and the Kangal Dog were originally distinct, pure Turkish breeds, and that they were combined to create the Anatolian Shepherd Dog. There still exists controversy on this subject. Akbash Dogs should be easy to recognize next to Kangals and Anatolian Shepherds because of their white appearance, although some Anatolian Shepherds may resemble the Akbash or the Kangal.
Currently, it is legal to export Akbash Dogs from Turkey but not Kangal Dogs. Kangals are considered the national dog breed of Turkey.
The Akbash Dog is not recognized by the American Kennel Club (AKC) but is recognized by the United Kennel Club (UKC) and by the FCI as of 2015. Akbash Dogs may be shown in American Rare Breed Association (ARBA) shows, and in International All Breed Canine Association (IABCA) shows.
