
== Description ==


=== Appearance ===
The Croatian sheepdog  is a weatherproof, adaptable breed. They are of low to medium height and the base color is always black, although there may be very small patches of white on its chest and/or toes.
A characteristic is the short hairs on its somewhat fox-like head and legs. The remainder of the coat is longer and wavy or curly.
The height at the withers in both sexes is between 16 and 21 inches and the length exceeds the height by approximately 10%.  Nowadays, some dogs are even taller; that is probably due to better nutrition and an easier life - they grow to their full genetic potential. Traditionally the tail is docked very short but, if undocked, it is carried curled over the dog's back.

HeadGenerally: The head is relatively light, lean and wedge shaped. The ratio between the muzzle and the skull is 9 : 11. The total length of the head is about 20 cm.
Skull: Slightly rounded skull tapering towards the nose. The eyebrow arches are not pronounced. The cheeks are rounded. The occiput can be distinct.
Stop: Slightly pronounced.FaceNose: Always black and in the line with the nose ridge.
Muzzle: Lean, nose ridge looking from the profile is straight and is a wedge-shaped extension of the skull. The lower jaw is well developed and forms a harmonious whole with the line of the nose ridge. The muzzle is neither pointed nor square.
Teeth: Well developed with a complete scissors bite. Level bite is acceptable but not desirable.
Lips: Dry, close fitting and supple. The visible lip pigment is black. Corner of the mouth is tight.
Eyes: Chestnut brown to black, medium in size, almond-shaped, and set horizontally, they give the dog a lively expression. The rims of the eyelids are dark pigmented and tight, fit close to the eyeballs.
Ears: Triangular in shape, medium-sized, erect or semi-erect, somewhat set to the side. Erect ears are more desirable. Ear cropping is not allowed.
NECK: Slightly rises above the back line, the upper and lower lines of the neck are straight. Moderately long, it is of medium strength, deep and well rounded, muscular. The skin is without dewlap and is covered with a dense coat.BodyWithers: Not pronounced. The transition to the neck is gradual.
Back: Straight, short and muscular.
Loin: Short and firmly coupled.
Chest: Medium long, broad and deep enough. Ribs well sprung, forechest slightly pronounced. The transition to the neck is in a straight line.
Belly: Slightly tucked-up. The loins are full and sturdy.
Croup: Medium long, slightly sloping down, muscular and fairly broad.TailSet medium high, with thick long hair, in repose it hangs relaxed or is carried at back level. In attention it is carried above the back line. Some dogs are born tailless or with a short tail, or the tail is docked so that in an adult male it is about 4 cm long. However, tail docking is now banned in Croatia.LimbsForequarters: The legs are straight, parallel and of medium length. Angulation of the front legs is more opened, the dog stands steeper. Shoulder blades are medium long and muscular, somewhat set steeper. The upper arm is relatively short. The forearm is long and muscular. Bones are lighter.
Pasterns dry, indistinct, short and not completely vertical. The feet are small, strong, semi-rabbit-like. The toes are well knitted, well and firmly cushioned. The nails are black or gray.
Hindquarters: The hind legs are medium-angulated. From behind, the legs are parallel. The lower thigh is long and the hock is set lower. The upper thigh is of medium width, well muscled. The hocks are dry and distinct, well angulated.
Hind feet are the same as the front ones, small and sturdy though somewhat elongated. Dewclaws are removed.
Gait/Movement: The Croatian Sheepdog moves in briskly trot with moderately long steps.CoatTexture: The length of hair on the back is between 7 and 14 cm. The foreface is always shorthaired. The ears are shorthaired on the outside and longhaired on the inside. The backside of the forelegs has longer hairs down to pastern and forms feathering. The hind legs have pronounced feathering from the buttocks to the hocks. The coat is relatively soft, wavy to curly, but must not be woolly. The undercoat must be dense.
Colour: The base color of the coat is black. A few white hairs can be tolerated. White markings on the head, body and tail are not permissible, but small white markings are permissible on the throat and the forechest. White markings on the toes or the legs are permissible but undesirable. White legs up to pasterns lower the dog's marks on shows.Height & WeightThe height at withers in males and females is between 40 and 50 cm.
Height: 16-21 inches (40–53 cm.)
Weight: 29-43 pounds (13–20 kg.)
