
== Cynological type and relations ==
Alopekis dogs represent a type dating back to the pre-specialisation era, since they combine hunting, herding and guarding abilities and other primitive characteristics of conformation and behaviour. The passage from Ctesias, mentioned by Julius Pollux, about the Cynomolgus dogs of Crete, is especially interesting, as it refers to dogs co-existing with buffalo / cattle herds and even suckling the milking cows and competing with bulls. It is possible that descendants of those dogs travelled to Northern Europe with the Greeks, the Romans, the Celts and later the Romani people (according to folk traditions) and contributed to breeds such as the Welsh Corgi and the Lancashire Heeler. The ancestors of the latter are said to have been brought to Britain by Romani people from the Mediterranean. The fact that these breeds are the only (together with the Alopekis) small – size contemporary breeds specializing in cattle-driving and herding (cattle dogs being in their vast majority much larger and of molossoid / molosser type), is quite remarkable in itself; it could also be seen as additional evidence, apart from the obvious physical similarities, that there is a shared genetic relation and common adaptation and specialization of the herding instinct in all these three breeds, originating in the Eastern regions of Crete (where marshland habitats were ideal for water buffalo herds), given the specific importance of the bull worship in the island's ancient history. The bull games or taurokathapsia (bull-leaping), a form of gymnastics performed by young acrobats and bulls in ancient Crete, are quite well-known; reading Ctesias' report, one wonders if dogs were ever included, or used to control any bull that became too aggressive during the games or the training sessions. (This passage also underlines the co-existence and inevitable genetic interaction between Cretan populations of Alopekis and Cretan Hounds. According to a very interesting report recorded by the Hellenic Association for the Protection and Rescue of Native Farm and Domestic Animals Breeds “Amaltheia”, there was until very recently a group of Alopekis dogs escorting water buffalo herds in Northern Greece. One of the areas where the breed still co-exists with water buffalo (brought to Greece by invading armies during the Persian Wars) is Serres. And the breed still serves flocks of sheep and goats and cattle also, in other parts of the country, to this day.
