
== Government ==

The government of the Marshall Islands operates under a mixed parliamentary-presidential system as set forth in its Constitution. Elections are held every four years in universal suffrage (for all citizens above 18), with each of the twenty-four constituencies (see below) electing one or more representatives (senators) to the lower house of RMI's unicameral legislature, the Nitijela. (Majuro, the capital atoll, elects five senators.) The President, who is head of state as well as head of government, is elected by the 33 senators of the Nitijela. Four of the five Marshallese presidents who have been elected since the Constitution was adopted in 1979 have been traditional paramount chiefs.In January 2016, senator Hilda Heine was elected by Parliament as the first female president of the Marshall Islands; previous president Casten Nemra lost office after serving two weeks in a vote of no confidence.Legislative power lies with the Nitijela. The upper house of Parliament, called the Council of Iroij, is an advisory body comprising twelve tribal chiefs. The executive branch consists of the President and the Presidential Cabinet, which consists of ten ministers appointed by the President with the approval of the Nitijela. The twenty-four electoral districts into which the country is divided correspond to the inhabited islands and atolls. There are currently four political parties in the Marshall Islands: Aelon̄ Kein Ad (AKA), United People's Party (UPP), Kien Eo Am (KEA) and United Democratic Party (UDP). Rule is shared by the AKA and the UDP. The following senators are in the legislative body:

Ailinglaplap Atoll – Christopher Loeak (AKA), Alfred Alfred, Jr. (IND)
Ailuk Atoll – Maynard Alfred (UDP)
Arno Atoll – Mike Halferty (KEA), Jejwadrik H. Anton (IND)
Aur Atoll – Hilda C. Heine (AKA)
Ebon Atoll – John M. Silk (UDP)
Enewetak Atoll – Jack J. Ading (KEA)
Jabat Island – Kessai H. Note (UDP)
Jaluit Atoll – Casten Nemra (IND), Daisy Alik Momotaro (IND)
Kili Island – Eldon H. Note (UDP)
Kwajalein Atoll – Michael Kabua (AKA), David R. Paul (KEA), Alvin T. Jacklick (KEA)
Lae Atoll – Thomas Heine (AKA)
Lib Island – Jerakoj Jerry Bejang (AKA)
Likiep Atoll – Leander Leander, Jr. (IND)
Majuro Atoll – Sherwood M. Tibon (KEA), Anthony Muller (KEA), Brenson S. Wase (UDP), David Kramer (KEA), Kalani Kaneko (KEA)
Maloelap Atoll – Bruce Bilimon (IND)
Mejit Island – Dennis Momotaro (AKA)
Mili Atoll – Wilbur Heine (AKA)
Namdrik Atoll – Wise Zackhras (IND)
Namu Atoll – Tony Aiseia (AKA)
Rongelap Atoll – Kenneth A. Kedi (IND)
Ujae Atoll – Atbi Riklon (IND)
Utirik Atoll – Amenta Mathew (KEA)
Wotho Atoll – David Kabua (AKA)
Wotje Atoll – Litokwa Tomeing (UPP)


=== Foreign affairs and defense ===

The Compact of Free Association with the United States gives the U.S. sole responsibility for international defense of the Marshall Islands. It gives islanders the right to emigrate to the United States and to work there.The Marshall Islands was admitted to the United Nations based on the Security Council's recommendation on August 9, 1991, in Resolution 704 and the General Assembly's approval on September 17, 1991, in Resolution 46/3. In international politics within the United Nations, the Marshall Islands has often voted consistently with the United States with respect to General Assembly resolutions.On April 28, 2015, the Iranian navy seized the Marshall Island-flagged MV Maersk Tigris near the Strait of Hormuz. The ship had been chartered by Germany's Rickmers Ship Management, which stated that the ship contained no special cargo and no military weapons. The ship was reported to be under the control of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard according to the Pentagon. Tensions escallated in the region due to the intensifying of Saudi-led coalition attacks in Yemen. The Pentagon reported that the destroyer USS Farragut and a maritime reconnaissance aircraft were dispatched upon receiving a distress call from the ship Tigris and it was also reported that all 34 crew members were detained. US defense officials have said that they would review U.S. defense obligations to the Government of the Marshall Islands in the wake of recent events and also condemned the shots fired at the bridge as "inappropriate". It was reported in May 2015 that Tehran would release the ship after it paid a penalty.Since 1991 the Republic of Marshall Islands Sea Patrol, a division of Marshall Islands Police, has operated the 160 ton patrol vessel RMIS Lomor.  The Lomor is one of 22 Pacific Forum patrol vessels Australia provided to smaller nations in the Pacific Forum.  While some other nations' missions for their vessels include sovereignty, protection, the terms of the Compact of Free Association restrict the Lomor to civilian missions, like fishery protection and search and rescue.
