
== Geography ==

Bulgaria occupies a portion of the eastern Balkan peninsula, bordering five countries—Greece and Turkey to the south, Macedonia and Serbia to the west, and Romania to the north. The land borders have a total length of 1,808 kilometres (1,123 mi), and the coastline has a length of 354 kilometres (220 mi). Its total area of 110,994 square kilometres (42,855 sq mi) ranks it as the world's 105th-largest country. Bulgaria's geographic coordinates are 43° N 25° E. The most notable topographical features are the Danubian Plain, the Balkan Mountains, the Thracian Plain, and the Rhodope Mountains. The southern edge of the Danubian Plain slopes upward into the foothills of the Balkans, while the Danube defines the border with Romania. The Thracian Plain is roughly triangular, beginning southeast of Sofia and broadening as it reaches the Black Sea coast.

The Balkan mountains run laterally through the middle of the country. The mountainous southwest has two distinct alpine ranges—Rila and Pirin, which border the lower but more extensive Rhodope Mountains to the east. Musala peak, at 2,925 metres (9,596 ft), is the highest point in both Bulgaria and the Balkan peninsula, and the Black Sea coast is the country's lowest point. Plains occupy about one-third of the territory, while plateaus and hills occupy 41 per cent. Most of the rivers are short and with low water levels. The longest river located solely in Bulgarian territory, the Iskar, has a length of 368 kilometres (229 mi). Other major rivers include the Struma and the Maritsa in the south.Bulgaria has a dynamic climate, which results from being positioned at the meeting point of the Mediterranean and continental air masses combined with the barrier effect of its mountains. Northern Bulgaria averages 1 °C (1.8 °F) cooler, and registers 200 millimetres (7.9 in) more precipitation, than the regions south of the Balkan mountains. Temperature amplitudes vary significantly in different areas. The lowest recorded temperature is −38.3 °C (−36.9 °F), while the highest is 45.2 °C (113.4 °F). Precipitation averages about 630 millimetres (24.8 in) per year, and varies from 500 millimetres (19.7 in) in Dobrudja to more than 2,500 millimetres (98.4 in) in the mountains. Continental air masses bring significant amounts of snowfall during winter.


=== Biodiversity and environment ===

The interaction of climatic, hydrological, geological and topographical conditions have produced a relatively wide variety of plant and animal species.
Bulgaria's biodiversity, one of the richest in Europe,is conserved in three national parks, 11 nature parks, 16 biosphere reserves and 565 protected areas. More than 35 per cent of its land area is covered by forests, where some of the oldest trees in the world, such as Baikushev's pine and the Granit oak, grow. Most of the plant and animal life is central European, although representatives of Arctic and alpine species are present at high altitudes. Flora includes more than 3,800 vascular plant species of which 170 are endemic and 150 are considered endangered. A checklist of larger fungi of Bulgaria reported that more than 1,500 species occur in the country. Fauna is primarily represented by owls, rock partridges, wallcreepers, red deer, pheasants and jackals.In 1998, the Bulgarian government approved the National Biological Diversity Conservation Strategy, a comprehensive programme seeking the preservation of local ecosystems, protection of endangered species and conservation of genetic resources. Bulgaria has some of the largest Natura 2000 areas in Europe covering 33.8 per cent of its territory. It also adopted the Kyoto Protocol and achieved its objective of reducing carbon dioxide emissions by 30 per cent from 1990 to 2009.However, pollution from factories and metallurgy works, and severe deforestation, continue to cause major problems for the health and welfare of the population. Particulate matter levels are the highest in Europe, especially in urban areas affected by automobile traffic and coal-based power stations. One of these, the lignite-fired Maritsa Iztok-2 station, is causing the highest damage to health and the environment in the entire European Union. Pesticide usage in agriculture, and antiquated industrial sewage systems, produce extensive soil and water pollution from chemicals and detergents. An improvement of water quality began in 1998 and has maintained a sustainable trend of moderate improvement. Over 75 per cent of surface rivers meet the standards for good quality. According to Yale University's 2012 Environmental Performance Index, Bulgaria is a "modest performer" in protecting the environment.
