
== In popular culture ==
Scenes from the final Jaws film (Jaws:  The Revenge) were filmed on a New Providence Island beach now known as "Jaws Beach".
The fourth official James Bond film, Thunderball (1965), was partly filmed in Nassau, where much of the story is set. Eon Productions were to return for filming underwater sequences in the famously clear waters, even when a Bond film's story was set elsewhere; for example, for The Spy Who Loved Me (1977).
The unofficial remake of Thunderball, Never Say Never Again (1983), was similarly partly filmed in the islands, though this version of the story was not as extensively set there.
Zeus and Roxanne is a 1997 family comedy/adventure film directed by George T. Miller. It revolves around the friendship between the title characters, a dog and a dolphin, respectively. It stars Steve Guttenberg and Kathleen Quinlan. Parts of the Movie was filmed in Grand Bahama.
Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest is a 2006 American fantasy swashbuckler film, the second installment of the Pirates of the Caribbean film series and the sequel to Pirates of the Caribbean. Parts of the movie was filmed in The Bahamas
After the Sunset is a 2004 action comedy film starring Pierce Brosnan as Max Burdett, a master thief caught in a pursuit with FBI agent Stan Lloyd, played by Woody Harrelson. The film was directed by Brett Ratner and shot in the Bahamas.
Into the Blue a 2005 American action-thriller film starring Paul Walker, Jessica Alba, Scott Caan, Ashley Scott, Josh Brolin, and James Frain. The film was directed by John Stockwell was filmed in the Bahamas
Tyler Perry's Why Did I Get Married? is a 2007 American comedy-drama film adaptation written, produced, directed, and starring Tyler Perry. Parts of the film was filmed in Eleuthera
The twenty-first official James Bond film, Casino Royale (2006), was in part set and filmed in the islands.
The Beatles' film Help! was filmed in part on New Providence Island and Paradise Island also in 1965.
Nassau is featured in the 2013 video game Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag as a pirate haven, housing the main protagonists. Historical pirates are encountered there such as Benjamin Hornigold, Edward Teach/Blackbeard, Charles Vane, "Calico" Jack Rackham, Anne Bonney and Mary Read.
