
== Culture ==


=== Festivals and holidays ===
Some of the festivals held each year in St. Barthélemy are:

The St. Barts Music Festival held every January, usually during the 2nd and 3rd weeks.
A French Carnival in February / March held for two weeks before Ash Wednesday and concluding with Ash Wednesday; on Ash Wednesday a black and white parade held at Shell Beach is the occasion to a notional burning of the image of Vaval, the Carnival King.
St. Barth Film Festival, held annually at the end of April, was established in 1996, and hosts Caribbean films for five days.
Armistice Day on May 8.
Abolition of Slavery Day on May 27 and October 9.
Bastille Day on July 14.
Victor Schoelcher Day on July 21 honouring Schoelcher, a French parliamentarian for his noble humanitarian act of abolishing slavery in French territory on April 27, 1848.
Assumption Day on August 15.
Fête de Saint Barthélemy feast day of Saint Barthélemy on August 24, in honour of the patron saint of the island. Church bells are rung, boats are blessed and a regatta is held, followed by fireworks and a public ball.
Festival of Gustavia held in August, an occasion of dragnet fishing and partying.
All Saints Day on November 1
Remembrance Day (Armistice Day).
Christmas Day on December 25; and New Year’s Eve on December 31.Some other festivals held are the Festival Gastronomique (April) and Yacht Festival (May). The national holidays observed are the Bastille Day and St. Barthélemy Day (day of adoption of French Constitution). Feast of St Louis is held on November 1 when thousands of candles are lit in the evening hours, which is a public holiday. All Souls Day is observed on November 2, and it is public holiday.


=== Music ===
The Caribbean, the birthplace of the calypso, méringue, soca, zouk and reggae music influence the culture tremendously. The St. Barthélemy Music Festival is a major international performing arts event held every year.


=== Cuisine ===
French cuisine, West Indian cuisine, Creole cuisine, Italian cuisine and Asian cuisine are common in St. Barthélemy. The island has over 70 restaurants serving many dishes and others are a significant number of gourmet restaurants; many of the finest restaurants are located in the hotels. There are also a number of snack restaurants which the French call "les snacks" or "les petits creux" which include sandwiches, pizzas and salads. West Indian cuisine, steamed vegetables with fresh fish is common; Creole dishes tend to be spicier. The island hosts gastronomic events throughout the year, with dishes such as spring roll of shrimp and bacon, fresh grilled lobster, Chinese noodle salad with coconut milk, and grilled beef fillet etc.In the early 1990s, the island had two cooking schools:  the Saint Barts Cooking School which emphasizes classical French cuisine, and Cooking in Paradise which emphasizes creole cuisine.


=== Fashion ===
The traditional costume which is seen only among older women consists of starched white bonnets called kichnottes.


=== Legend ===
A popular legend related to St. Barthélemy is of a seafarer hooligan looking to loot Spanish ships. French pirate Daniel Montbars, who was given the epithet "Montbars the Exterminator", took shelter in St. Barthélemy during his pirate operations and hid the loot in the sandy coves at Anse du Gouverneur.


=== Sports ===

Rugby is a popular sport in the island. One of the major teams on the island is "Les Barracudas," named after the ferocious fish of the Caribbean. They often play teams from Anguilla and other surrounding islands.Gustavia is also known as a haven for yachting, with many events being held there each year. These include the St Barths Bucket Regatta, the Saint Barth’s Cup and Les Voiles de St. Barth in April, and the International Regatta in May. Deep sea fishing is also undertaken from the waterfront of Lorient, Flamands and Corossol to fish for tuna, marlin, bonito, barracuda and wahoo. St Barth Open Fishing tournament is held in July.The Transat AG2R Race, held every alternate year, is an event which originates in Concarneau in Brittany, France, reaching St. Barthélemy. It is a boat race with boats of 10-metre (33-foot) length with a single hull and with essential safety equipment. Each boat is navigated by two sailors. Kitesurfing and other water sports have also become popular on the island in recent years, especially at Grand Cul-de-Sac beach (Baie de Grand Cul de Sac) for windy sports as kitesurfing and Saint Jean Beach ( Baie de Saint Jean), Lorient, Toiny and Anse des Cayes for surfing. Tennis is also popular on the island and it has several tennis clubs, Tennis Clube de Flamboyant in Grand Cul-de-Sac, AJOE Tennis Club in Orient and ASCO in Colombier.The Swedish Marathon Race, also called the Gustavialoppet,  is held in December. Races of 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) and 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) are conducted when children, women and men participate in the races.
