
== Infrastructure ==


=== Transport ===

Hong Kong has a highly developed and sophisticated transport network. Over 90% of daily journeys are made on public transport, the highest such percentage in the world. The Octopus card, a contactless smart payment card, is widely accepted on railways, buses, and ferries, and can be used for payment in most retail stores.The Mass Transit Railway (MTR) is an extensive passenger railway network, connecting 93 metro stations throughout the territory. With a daily ridership of over five million, the system serves 41% of all public transit passengers in the city and is extremely punctual, achieving an on-time rate of 99.9%. Cross-boundary train service to Shenzhen is offered by the East Rail line and longer distance inter-city trains to Guangzhou, Shanghai, and Beijing are operated from Hung Hom Station. Connecting service to the national high-speed rail system is scheduled to begin in 2018, after construction of West Kowloon Station completes.While public transport systems handle the majority of passenger traffic, there are over 500,000 private vehicles licensed in Hong Kong. Automobiles drive on the left, unlike in mainland China, due to historical influence from the British Empire. Vehicle traffic is extremely congested in urban areas, exacerbated by limited space to expand roads and a growing number of vehicles. More than 18,000 taxicabs, easily identifiable by their bright paint, are licensed to carry riders in the territory. Bus services operate more than 700 routes across the territory, with smaller public light buses (also called minibuses) complementing them by serving areas where standard buses cannot reach or do not operate in as frequently or directly. Highways are organised as the Hong Kong Strategic Route and Exit Number System, connecting all major geographic areas of the territory. When completed, the Hong Kong–Zhuhai–Macao Bridge will create a direct route to the western side of the Pearl River estuary.

Hong Kong International Airport is the primary airport for the territory. Over 100 airlines operate flights from the airport, including locally based Cathay Pacific (flag carrier), Hong Kong Airlines, Regional carrier Cathay Dragon, and cargo airline Air Hong Kong. It is the eighth-busiest airport by passenger traffic and also handles the most air cargo traffic in the world. The majority of private recreational aviation traffic flies through Shek Kong Airfield under supervision of the Hong Kong Aviation Club.The Star Ferry operates two lines across Victoria Harbour for its 53,000 daily passengers. Ferries also serve outlying islands inaccessible by other means. Smaller kai-to boats serve the most remote coastal settlements. Cross-boundary travel to Macau and mainland China is available by ferry as well. Junk ships, once commonplace in Hong Kong waters, are no longer widely available for transport and are currently used for tourism and private use.The Peak Tram, the first public transport system in Hong Kong, has provided vertical rail transport between Central and Victoria Peak since 1888. In the Central and Western District, there is an extensive system of escalators and moving pavements, including the longest outdoor covered escalator system in the world, the Mid-Levels escalator. Hong Kong Tramways covers a portion of Hong Kong Island. The MTR operates the Light Rail system serving the northwestern New Territories.


=== Utilities ===

Hong Kong imports almost all its generated electricity and fuel. The vast majority of this energy comes from fossil fuels, with 46% from coal and 47% from petroleum. The rest is from other imports, including nuclear energy generated on the mainland. Renewable sources only account for a negligible amount of total energy generated for the territory. Wind power sources have been developed at very low scale, and a small number of private homes have deployed solar panels for residential use.With few natural lakes and rivers, a high population density, inaccessible groundwater sources, and extremely seasonal rainfall, the territory does not have a reliable source of fresh water. The Dongjiang River in Guangdong supplies 70% of the city's water, while the remaining demand is filled by harvesting rainwater. Toilets flush using seawater, greatly reducing freshwater usage.Broadband Internet access is widely available, with 92.6% of households connected. Connections over fibre-optic infrastructure are increasingly prevalent, contributing to the high regional average connection speed of 21.9 Mbit/s, ranked fourth in the world. Mobile phone usage in Hong Kong is ubiquitous; there are more than 18 million active mobile phone subscribers, more than double the total number of residents in the territory.
