
== Foreign investment ==
The private sector is seen as the major development partner, an engine of growth that will help jump start the economy and eventually lead to long-term growth in the Governments development agenda. The revised investment code was issued in 1994. The main objective of the investment code is to promote investment in Eritrea as well as develop and use the country’s natural resources. The investment code provides various benefits to investors. For instance, profit and dividends of investors, payments for a foreign loan, fees, royalties, or proceeds received from liquidation of investment and/or expansion, and payment received from the sale of transfer of shares will be remitted in accordance with the rate of exchange prevailing at that time. There is no minimum threshold value of investment. All areas of investment are open to all investors both foreign and domestic.Foreign capital may establish any enterprise on its own or in partnership with local capital. Moreover, the investment code guarantee, that capital and other associated foreign-owned assets will not be nationalized without due laws. To this effect, Eritrea has also signed the convention establishing Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) and the convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes between States and Nationals of other States.
Given that greenstone belt of Eritrea, which hosts precious and base metals, covers 70% of the country, Government in particular perceives mining as a crucial part of economic development and encouraging additional investments in the mining sector, however with a focus on sustainable mining.Eritrea's first mine, the Bisha Mining Share Company, a joint venture between Canadian mining company Nevsun Resources Ltd. and the Eritrean National Mining Corporation (ENAMCO), employs about 1,500 people and is a 24-hour operation that produces 688tn of copper concentrate and 166tn of copper every day. It is expected to yield copper and zinc until 2021, but further exploration in nearby Harena and Mogoraib River could to extend its life which would reflect positively on local economic developments.  Next to come on stream is the Zara gold mine, joint-owned by ENAMCO and China SFECO Group  which officially started operations in January 2016.In addition to Nevsun Resources and China SFECO, which are exploring near their active mines, 14 foreign firms from Canada, Australia, China, Russia, India and Sudan are exploring for mineral assets in the country. Among those closest to realisation is the Colluli potash project, which is owned by Australian company Danakali and among the shallowest and high grade potash deposits in the world, and with production to begin by 2019. The mine sits in the Danakil Depression, one of the hottest and lowest points on earth, where more than 6bn tn of measured and indicated potassium-bearing salts have been identified to date. The improved mining legislative increased interest of large institutional investors such as US banking giant JPMorgan Chase.While there are opportunities, especially in the extractive industries sector, the Government of the State of Eritrea (GSE) maintains a command economy, with government activities predominating over private enterprise. Although this impacts Eritrea`s position on World Banks Doing business list, according to its Five Year Indicative Development Plan 2014-2018, the GSE states that it wants to encourage Foreign Direct Investment. Government claims that changes yielded improvement in overall investment climate which is characterized by competitive tax regimes, full guarantees and protection of investments. A similar line is maintained by companies currently operating in Eritrea who claim no experience of corruption and claim a stable working relationship with the government.Eritrea’s labour pool is well qualified compared with those in neighbouring states. Eritreans start English classes in elementary school and are educated almost exclusively in English from grade six onwards. The people are generally resourceful and industrious. Historically, corruption in Eritrea appears less pervasive that in other countries in the region. In regard to this there are indications of increased interest of foreign investors and trade partners, in particular in leading European countries such as Germany.
