
== Economy ==

Grenada's economic picture is soured by a heavy external debt problem.  With government debt service payments running at about 25% of total revenues in 2017, Grenada was listed 9th worst in a study of 126 developing countries. Tourist facilities are being expanded; tourism is the leading foreign exchange earner. Major short-term concerns are the rising fiscal deficit and the deterioration in the external account balance. Grenada shares a common central bank and a common currency (the East Caribbean dollar) with seven other members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS).


=== Agriculture and exports ===
Grenada is a leading producer of several different spices. Cinnamon, cloves, ginger, mace, allspice, orange/citrus peels, wild coffee used by the locals, and especially nutmeg, providing 20% of the world supply, are all important exports. Grenada is the world's second largest producer of nutmeg (after Indonesia), with nutmeg depicted on the Grenadian flag.
The Grenada Chocolate Company has pioneered the cultivation of organic cocoa, which is also processed into finished bars.
In 2017, the Pure Chocolate Festival will be celebrating its fourth year of existence as a formal festival. Some of the activities which have taken place according to the website Grenada Chocolate Festival are visits to the cocoa farms which have been in existence for approximately one hundred (100) years and which are located in rainforests which are ecologically sensitive; dance the cocoa which is a traditional way to separate the skins from the seed of the cocoa or sample cocoa infused cuisine which may have been developed as part of the culture of the country.


=== Tourism ===

Tourism is Grenada's main economic force. Conventional beach and water-sports tourism is largely focused in the southwest region around St George, the airport and the coastal strip. Ecotourism is growing in significance. Most small ecofriendly guesthouses are located in the Saint David and Saint John parishes. The tourism industry is increasing dramatically with the construction of a large cruise ship pier and esplanade. Up to four cruise ships per day were visiting St. Georges in 2007–2008 during the cruise ship season.
Tourism is concentrated in the southwest of the island, around St. George, Grand Anse, Lance Aux Epines, and Point Salines. Grenada has many idyllic beaches around its coastline including the 3 km (1.9 mi) long Grand Anse Beach in St George which is considered to be one of the finest beaches in the world and often appears in countdowns of the world's top ten beaches. Besides these excellent beaches, tourists' favourite points of interest yet in Grenada are the waterfalls. The nearest to St. George's is the Annandale Waterfalls, but other notable ones like Mt. Carmel, Concord, Seven Sisters and Tufton Hall are also within easy reach.


==== Natural and historical places ====

In 2017 the Carriacou Maroon & String Band Music Festival enters its seventh year. In 2017, occurring in April, the event lasts for three days, occurs in three venues, however it is classified as one festival according to the pure Grenada website. The concept of String Bands is historical in nature.
In 2017 the Annual Budget Marine Spice Island BillFish Tournament (48) will be entering its 48th year of existence. The Tournament lasts for four days and in 2017 it starts on Jan 21.Island Water World Sailing Week, as its name suggests, is an event which lasts for a week and in 2017 will be held towards the end of January into February. This event is similar to the America Cup which is hosted upon agreement or calling out.
Many of these events stimulate the economy as they attract boats and persons who may need repairs to their boats or who may need to learn new routes to shelter their boats during hurricanes or Inter Tropical Convergence Zones (ITCZs) which are weather systems which affect this part of the world for almost half of the year every year.The Grenada Sailing Festival Work Boat Regatta starts in January and lasts for a few days. From the photos on the website Grenada Sailing Festival, it appears that the style of the race is similar is similar to that event in which CARICOM national, Andrew Lewis raced at the 2016 Summer Olympics.


=== Education ===
St. George's University has rapidly expanded in recent years, and has a major economic impact, particularly in southern portions of the island. While some of its approximately 5,000 students are from Grenada, including many undergraduates, and many medical students serve rotations off of the island, the majority of students are from other countries and bring substantial revenue to the island while studying there. St. George's University is among the island's largest employers, and students patronise many off-campus landlords and other businesses.St. George's University is one of the Organisation of American States (OAS) Consortium of Universities according to the OAS webpage.


=== Transport ===
Flights at the Maurice Bishop International Airport connect with other Caribbean islands, the United States, Canada, and Europe. There is a daily fast ferry service between St. George and Hillsborough.
