
== Military bases ==

Note: Naval Air Station Agana has been deactivated. The U.S. military maintains jurisdiction over its bases, which cover approximately 39,000 acres (16,000 ha), or 29% of the island's total land area:

U.S. Naval Base Guam, U.S. Navy – Sumay
U.S. Coast Guard Sector Guam, – Sumay
Andersen Air Force Base, U.S. Air Force – Yigo
Apra Harbor – Orote peninsula
Ordnance Annex, U.S. Navy – South Central Highlands (formerly known as Naval Magazine)
Naval Computer and Telecommunications Station, U.S. Navy – Barrigada and Finegayan
Joint Force Headquarters-Guam, Guam National Guard – Radio Barrigada and Fort Juan MunaIn addition to on-shore military installations, Guam, along with the rest of the Mariana Islands, is being prepared to be the westernmost military training range for the U.S.  Guam is currently viewed as a key military hub that will further allow U.S. military power to be projected via sea and sky.
The U.S. military has proposed building a new aircraft carrier berth on Guam and moving 8,600 Marines, and 9,000 of their dependents, to Guam from Okinawa, Japan. Including the required construction workers, this buildup would increase Guam's population by 45%. In a February 2010 letter, the United States Environmental Protection Agency sharply criticized these plans because of a water shortfall, sewage problems and the impact on coral reefs. By 2012, these plans had been cut to have only a maximum of 4,800 Marines stationed on the island, two thirds of whom would be there on a rotational basis without their dependents.With the proposed increased military presence stemming from the upcoming preparation efforts and relocation efforts of U.S. Marines from Okinawa, Japan to Guam slated to begin in 2010 and last for the next several years thereafter, the amount of total land that the military will control or tenant may grow to or surpass 40% of the entire landmass of Guam.
In January 2011, the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act for FY2011 indicated that recent significant events will delay the deadline for realigning U.S. Marine Corps service members and their families from Okinawa to Guam. The transfer may be as late as 2020. In addition, the Defense Authorization Act cut approximately $320 million from the 2011 budget request.
Villagers and the military community are interconnected in many ways.  Many villagers serve in the military or are retired.  Many active duty personnel and Defense Department civilians also live in the villages outside of the military installation areas.  The military and village communities have "adoption" programs where Guam's population and military personnel stationed on Guam perform community service projects.
