
== Demographics ==

The population of Bulgaria is 7,364,570 people according to the 2011 national census. The majority of the population, or 72.5 percent, reside in urban areas. As of 2017, Sofia is the most populated urban centre with 1,325,429 people, followed by Plovdiv (345,000), Varna (344,000), Burgas (209,000) and Ruse (160,000). Bulgarians are the main ethnic group and comprise 84.8 percent of the population. Turkish and Roma minorities comprise 8.8 and 4.9 percent, respectively; some 40 smaller minorities comprise 0.7 percent, and 0.8 percent do not self-identify with an ethnic group. Former Statistics head Reneta Indzhova has disputed the 2011 census figures, suggesting the actual population is smaller than reported and a higher percentage of citizens are of Romani origin. The Roma minority is usually underestimated in census data and may represent up to 11 per cent of the population.Bulgaria is in a state of demographic crisis. It has had negative population growth since the early 1990s, when the economic collapse caused a long-lasting emigration wave. Some 937,000 to 1,200,000 people—mostly young adults—left the country by 2005. The total fertility rate (TFR) was estimated at 1.46 children born per woman in 2017. The majority of children are born to unmarried women. Furthermore, a third of all households consist of only one person and 75.5 percent of families do not have children under the age of 16. The resulting birth rates are among the lowest in the world while death rates are among the highest.More than 80% of all deaths are due to cancer and cardiovascular conditions. Mortality rates may be amenable with timely, adequate health care, which the current system fails to provide fully. Although healthcare in Bulgaria is universal, out-of-pocket expenses account for nearly half of all healthcare spending, and significantly limit access to medical care. Other problems disrupting care provision are the emigration of doctors due to low wages, understaffed and under-equipped regional hospitals, supply shortages and frequent changes to the basic service package for those insured.
Public expenditures for education are far below the European Union average as well. Educational standards were once high, but have deteriorated significantly over the past decade. Bulgarian students were among the highest-scoring in the world in terms of reading in 2001, performing better than their Canadian and German counterparts; by 2006, scores in reading, math and science had dropped. Although average literacy stands at 98.4% with no significant difference between sexes, functional illiteracy is significant. The PISA study of 2015 found 41.5% of pupils in the 9th grade to be functionally illiterate in reading, maths and science. The Ministry of Education and Science partially funds public schools, colleges and universities, sets criteria for textbooks and oversees the publishing process. Education in primary and secondary public schools is free. The process spans through 12 grades, where grades one through eight are primary and nine through twelve are secondary level. Higher education consists of a 4-year bachelor degree and a 1-year master's degree. Bulgaria's highest-ranked higher education institution is Sofia University.All ethnic groups speak Bulgarian, either as a first or as a second language. Bulgarian is the only language with official status and native for 85.2 percent of the population. The oldest written Slavic language, Bulgarian is distinguishable from the other languages in this group through certain grammatical peculiarities such as the lack of noun cases and infinitives, and a suffixed definite article.More than three-quarters of Bulgarians subscribe to Eastern Orthodoxy. Sunni Muslims are the second-largest religious community and constitute 10 percent of Bulgaria's overall religious makeup, although a majority of them are not observant and find the use of Islamic veils in schools unacceptable. Less than three percent of the population are affiliated with other religions, 11.8 percent do not self-identify with a religion, and 21.8 percent do not state their beliefs. The Bulgarian Orthodox Church gained autocephalous status in 927 AD, and currently has 12 dioceses and over 2,000 priests. Bulgaria is a secular state with guaranteed religious freedom by constitution, but Orthodoxy is designated as a "traditional" religion.
