
== Geology ==
The Bahamas is part of the Lucayan Archipelago, which continues into the Turks and Caicos Islands, the Mouchoir Bank, the Silver Bank, and the Navidad Bank.The Bahamas Platform, which includes the Bahamas, Southern Florida, Northern Cuba, the Turks and Caicos, and the Blake Plateau, formed about 150 Ma, not long after the formation of the North Atlantic.  The 6.4 km thick limestones, which predominately make up The Bahamas, date back to the Cretaceous.  These limestones would have been deposited in shallow seas, assumed to be a stretched and thinned portion of the North American continental crust.  Sediments were forming at about the same rate as the crust below was sinking due to the added weight.  Thus, the entire area consisted of a large marine plain with some islands.  Then, at about 80 Ma, the area became flooded by the Gulf Stream.  This resulted in the drowning of the Blake Plateau, the separation of The Bahamas from Cuba and Florida, the separation of the southeastern Bahamas into separate banks, the creation of the Cay Sal Bank, plus the Little and Great Bahama Banks.  Sedimentation from the "carbonate factory" of each bank, or atoll, continues today at the rate of about 2 cm per kyr. Coral reefs form the "retaining walls" of these atolls, within which oolites and pellets form.Coral growth was greater through the Tertiary, until the start of the Ice Ages, and hence those deposits are more abundant below a depth of 36 m.  In fact, an ancient extinct reef exists half a km seaward of the present one, 30 m below sea level.  Oolites form when oceanic water penetrate the shallow banks, increasing the temperature about 3 °C and the salinity by 0.5 per cent. Cemented ooids are referred to as grapestone.  Additionally, giant stromatolites are found off the Exuma Cays.Sea level changes resulted in a drop in sea level, causing wind blown oolite to form sand dunes with distinct cross-bedding.  Overlapping dunes form oolitic ridges, which become rapidly lithified through the action of rainwater, called eolianite.  Most islands have ridges ranging from 30 to 45 m, though Cat Island has a ridge 60 m in height.  The land between ridges is conducive to the formation of lakes and swamps.Solution weathering of the limestone results in a "Bahamian Karst" topography.  This includes potholes, Blue holes such as Dean's Blue Hole, sinkholes, beachrock such as the Bimini Road ("pavements of Atlantis"), limestone crust, caves due to the lack of rivers, and sea caves.  Several blue holes are aligned along the South Andros Fault line. Tidal flats and tidal creeks are common, but the more impressive drainage patterns are formed by troughs and canyons such as Great Bahama Canyon with the evidence of turbidity currents and turbidite deposition.The stratigraphy of the islands consists of the Middle Pleistocene Owl's Hole Formation, overlain by the Late Pleistocene Grotto Beach Formation, and then the Holocene Rice Bay Formation.  However, these units are not necessarily stacked on top of each other but can be located laterally.  The oldest formation, Owl's Hole, is capped by a terra rosa paleosoil, as is the Grotto Beach, unless eroded.  The Grotto Beach Formation is the most widespread.
