
== Government ==

The United Kingdom is responsible for the island's defence and ultimately for good governance, and for representing the island in international forums, while the island's own parliament and government have competence over all domestic matters.


=== Socio-political structure ===

The island's parliament, Tynwald, is claimed to have been in continuous existence since 979 or earlier, purportedly making it the oldest continuously governing body in the world, though evidence supports a much later date. Tynwald is a bicameral or tricameral legislature, comprising the House of Keys (directly elected by universal suffrage with a voting age of 16 years) and the Legislative Council (consisting of indirectly elected and ex-officio members). These two bodies also meet together in joint session as Tynwald Court.
The executive branch of government is the Council of Ministers, which is composed of members of the House of Keys. It is headed by the Chief Minister, currently (2017) Howard Quayle MHK.
Vice-regal functions of the head of state are performed by a Lieutenant Governor.


=== External relations and security ===


==== Defence ====
Under British law, the Isle of Man is not part of the United Kingdom. However, the UK takes care of its external and defence affairs. There are no independent military forces on the Isle of Man, although HMS Ramsey is affiliated with the town of the same name. From 1938 to 1955 there was the Manx Regiment of the British Territorial Army, which saw extensive action during the Second World War. In 1779, the Manx Fencible Corps, a fencible regiment of three companies, was raised; it was disbanded in 1783 at the end of the American War of Independence. Later, the Royal Manx Fencibles was raised at the time of the French Revolutionary Wars and Napoleonic Wars. The 1st Battalion (of 3 companies) was raised in 1793. A 2nd Battalion (of 10 companies) was raised in 1795, and it saw action during the Irish Rebellion of 1798. The regiment was disbanded in 1802. A third body of Manx Fencibles was raised in 1803 to defend the island during the Napoleonic Wars and to assist the Revenue. It was disbanded in 1811. In 2015 a multi-capability recruiting and training unit of the British Army Reserve was established in Douglas.


==== Emergency services ====
The Isle of Man Government maintains five emergency services. These are:

Isle of Man Constabulary (police)
Isle of Man Coastguard
Isle of Man Fire and Rescue Service
Isle of Man Ambulance Service
Isle of Man Civil Defence CorpsAll of these services are controlled directly by the Isle of Man Government, and are independent of the United Kingdom. Nonetheless, the Isle of Man Constabulary voluntarily submits to inspection by the British inspectorate of police, and the Isle of Man Coastguard contracts Her Majesty's Coastguard (UK) for air-sea rescue operations.


==== Citizenship ====

Citizenship in the Isle of Man is governed by British law. Passports issued by the Isle of Man Passport Office say "British Islands – Isle of Man" on the cover but the nationality status stated on the passport is simply "British Citizen". Although Manx passport holders are British citizens, because the Isle of Man is not part of the European Union, people born on the island without a parent or grandparent either born, naturalised, registered or resident for more than five consecutive years in the United Kingdom do not have the same rights as other British citizens with regard to employment and establishment in the EU. Isle of Man passports can be issued to any British citizen in the Isle of Man (whether or not that person has "Manx status" as an Isle of Man worker under the local Isle of Man employment laws). They can also be issued to Manx-connected British citizens residing in Britain or either of the other Crown Dependencies.


==== European Union ====
The Isle of Man is neither part of the European Union, nor has a special status, and thus did not take part in the 2016 referendum on the UK's EU membership. However, Protocol 3 of the UK's Act of Accession to the Treaty of Rome included the Isle of Man within the EU's customs area, allowing for trade in Manx goods without tariffs throughout the EU. As it is not part of the EU's internal market, there are still limitations on the movement of capital, services and labour.
EU citizens are entitled to travel and reside, but not work, in the island without restriction. Manx citizens—without the hereditary qualification outlined above—are similarly restricted from working in the EU.The effect of the UK leaving the European Union is uncertain. The UK has confirmed that the Crown Dependencies' position will be included in the Brexit negotiations.


==== Commonwealth of Nations ====
The Isle of Man is not itself a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. By virtue of its relationship with the United Kingdom, it takes part in several Commonwealth institutions, including the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association and the Commonwealth Games. The Government of the Isle of Man has made calls for a more integrated relationship with the Commonwealth, including more direct representation and enhanced participation in Commonwealth organisations and meetings, including Commonwealth Heads of Government Meetings. The Chief Minister of the Isle of Man has said: "A closer connection with the Commonwealth itself would be a welcome further development of the island's international relationships."


=== Politics ===

Most Manx politicians stand for election as independents rather than as representatives of political parties. Though political parties do exist, their influence is not nearly as strong as in the United Kingdom.
There are three political parties in the Isle of Man. The Liberal Vannin Party (established 2006) has two seats in the House of Keys; it promotes greater Manx independence and more accountability in government. The Manx Labour Party is the other: it held two seats in the Legislative Council until 28 February 2018 when it reduced to one seat. The Isle of Man Green Party was established in 2016 but currently only has representation on a local government level.A number of pressure groups also exist on the island. Mec Vannin advocate the establishment of a sovereign republic. The Positive Action Group campaign for three key elements to be introduced into the governance of the island: open accountable government, rigorous control of public finances, and a fairer society.


=== Local government ===

Local government on the Isle of Man is based partly on the island's 17 ancient parishes. There are two types of local authorities:

a corporation for the Borough of Douglas, and bodies of commissioners for the town districts of Castletown, Peel and Ramsey, and
the village districts of Kirk Michael, Onchan, Port Erin and Port St Mary, and the 14 "parish districts" (those parishes or parts of parishes which do not fall within the districts previously mentioned).Local authorities are under the supervision of the Isle of Man Government's Department of Local Government and the Environment (DOLGE).
