
== External links ==

Government(in French) (in Haitian Creole) President of Haiti
(in French) Prime Minister of Haiti
(in French) Haitian ParliamentGeneral informationHaiti at Curlie (based on DMOZ)
Haiti at Encyclopædia Britannica.
"Haiti". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 
Haiti at UCB Libraries GovPubs.
A Country Study: Haiti from the US Library of Congress (December 1989).
 Wikimedia Atlas of Haiti
Haiti profile from the BBC News.
Country Profile at New Internationalist.
Web Site about Safe and Sustainable Water Solutions for HaitiMapsCollection of maps from the Perry-Castañeda Library at the University of Texas at Austin.
Map of Haiti from the United Nations.HistoryA Bibliography of Theses and Dissertations Related to Haiti – 20th Century
Haiti Digital Library – a Project of Duke University
Irving, Washington. The life and voyages of Christopher Colombus; together with the voyages of his companions, Vol. 1, London, John Murray, 1849. Manioc
Irving, Washington. The life and voyages of Christopher Colombus; together with the voyages of his companions, Vol. 2, London, John Murray, 1849. Manioc
Saint John, Spencer Buckingham. Hayti or the black Republic, London, Smith Elder, 1884. Manioc
Harvey, William Woodis. Sketches of Hayti; from the expulsion of the French, to the death of Christophe, London, L. B. Seeley and son, 1827. Manioc
Mackenzie, Charles. Notes on Haïti, made during a residence in that Republic, Vol. 1, London, Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, 1830. Manioc
Mackenzie, Charles. Notes on Haïti, made during a residence in that Republic, Vol. 2, London, Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, 1830. Manioc
Edwards, Bryan. An historical survey of the French colony in the island of St. Domingo ..., London, John Stockdale, 1797. Manioc
Hazard, Samuel. Santo Domingo : past and present with a glance at Hayti, [s. l.], 1872. ManiocRelief organizationsThe ICRC in Haiti (International Committee of the Red Cross).
Hope for Haiti, education and grassroots development in rural Haiti.
Instituto Dominicano de Desarrollo Integral, the Dominican parent of the Haitian Institute of Integral Developmen