
== Demographics ==

Ethnicities indigenous to Brunei include the Belait, Brunei Bisaya (not to be confused with the Bisaya/Visaya of the nearby Philippines), indigenous Bruneian Malay, Dusun, Kedayan, Lun Bawang, Murut and Tutong.
The population of Brunei in 2016 was 423,196 of which 76% live in urban areas. The rate of urbanisation is estimated at 2.13% per year from 2010 to 2015. The average life expectancy is 77.7 years. In 2014, 65.7% of the population were Malay, 10.3% are Chinese, 3.4% are indigenous, with 20.6% smaller groups making up the rest.
The official language of Brunei is Malay. The Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports supports for a lingual movement aimed at the increased use of the language in Brunei.The principal spoken language is Melayu Brunei (Brunei Malay). Brunei Malay is rather divergent from standard Malay and the rest of the Malay dialects, being about 84% cognate with standard Malay, and is mostly mutually unintelligible with it.English and Chinese are also widely spoken, English is also used in business, as a working language, and as the language of instruction from primary to tertiary education, and there is a relatively large expatriate community.Most expat are coming from non-Muslim countries such as Australia, United Kingdom, South Korea, Japan, The Philippines, Thailand, Cambodia, Vietnam and India.
Other languages and dialects spoken include Arabic, Kedayan Malay dialect, Tutong Malay dialect, Murut and Dusun.


=== Religion ===

Islam is the official religion of Brunei, specifically that of the Sunni branch, as dictated by the Madhhab of Shafi‘i. Two-thirds of the population, including the majority of Bruneian Malays adhere to Islam. Other faiths practised are Buddhism (13%, mainly by the Chinese) and Christianity (10%).  Freethinkers, mostly Chinese, form about 7% of the population. Although most of them practise some form of religion with elements of Buddhism, Confucianism, and Taoism, they prefer to present themselves as having practised no religion officially, hence labelled as atheists in official censuses. Followers of indigenous religions are about 2% of the population.


=== Languages ===

The official language of Brunei is Standard Malay, for which both the Latin alphabet and the Arabic alphabet are used. The local dialect, Melayu Brunei (Brunei Malay), is the most widely spoken language.
English is widely used as a business and official language and it is spoken by a majority of the population in Brunei.
The Chinese minority in Brunei speak a number of Chinese varieties.
Arabic (عربي) is the religious language of Muslims. Therefore, Arabic is taught in schools, particularly religious schools, and also in institutes of higher learning. As of 2004, there are six Arabic schools and one religious teachers' college in Brunei. A majority of Brunei's Muslim population has had some form of formal or informal education in the reading, writing and pronunciation of the Arabic language as part of their religious education.
