
== Economy and infrastructure ==

The economy of Peru is the 48th largest in the world (ranked by PPP), and the income level is classified as upper middle by the World Bank. Peru is, as of  2011, one of the world's fastest-growing economies owing to the economic boom experienced during the 2000s. It has an above-average Human Development Index of .74 which has seen steady improvement over the last 25 years. Historically, the country's economic performance has been tied to exports, which provide hard currency to finance imports and external debt payments. Although they have provided substantial revenue, self-sustained growth and a more egalitarian distribution of income have proven elusive. According to 2015 data, 19.3% of its total population is poor, including 9% that lives in extreme poverty. Inflation in 2012 was the lowest in Latin America at only 1.8%, but increased in 2013 as oil and commodity prices rose; as of  2014 it stands at 2.5%. The unemployment rate has fallen steadily in recent years, and as of  2012 stands at 3.6%.
Peruvian economic policy has varied widely over the past decades. The 1968–1975 government of Juan Velasco Alvarado introduced radical reforms, which included agrarian reform, the expropriation of foreign companies, the introduction of an economic planning system, and the creation of a large state-owned sector. These measures failed to achieve their objectives of income redistribution and the end of economic dependence on developed nations.Despite these results, most reforms were not reversed until the 1990s, when the liberalizing government of Alberto Fujimori ended price controls, protectionism, restrictions on foreign direct investment, and most state ownership of companies. Reforms have permitted sustained economic growth since 1993, except for a slump after the 1997 Asian financial crisis.Services account for 53% of Peruvian gross domestic product, followed by manufacturing (22.3%), extractive industries (15%), and taxes (9.7%). Recent economic growth has been fueled by macroeconomic stability, improved terms of trade, and rising investment and consumption. Trade is expected to increase further after the implementation of a free trade agreement with the United States signed on 12 April 2006. Peru's main exports are copper, gold, zinc, textiles, and fish meal; its major trade partners are the United States, China, Brazil, and Chile.


=== Water supply and sanitation ===

The water and sanitation sector in Peru has made important advances in the last two decades, including the increase of water coverage from 30% to 85% between 1980 and 2010. 
Sanitation coverage has also increased from 9% to 37% from 1985 to 2010 
in rural areas. Advances have also been achieved concerning the disinfection of drinking water and in sewage treatment. Nevertheless, many challenges remain, such as:

Insufficient service coverage;
Poor service quality which puts the population’s health at risk;
Deficient sustainability of built systems;
Tariffs that do not cover the investment and operational costs, as well as the maintenance of services;
Institutional and financial weakness; and,
Excess of human resources, poorly qualified, and high staff turnover.
