
== Politics and government ==
Until 2007, administratively, the whole island of St. Barthélemy was a French commune (commune de Saint-Barthélemy) part of Guadeloupe, which is an overseas région and overseas département of France, but, as one of the overseas countries and territories, not a part of the European Union : the inhabitants vote as European citizens but the local law derogate from Community law. In 2003, the population voted through referendum in favour of secession from Guadeloupe in order to form a separate overseas collectivity (COM) of France.On 7 February 2007, the French Parliament passed a bill granting COM status to both St. Barthélemy and (separately) to the neighbouring Saint Martin. The new status took effect on 15 July 2007, when the first territorial council was elected, according to the law. The island has a president (elected every five years), a unicameral Territorial Council of nineteen members who are elected by popular vote and serve for five-year terms, and an executive council of seven members. Elections to these councils were first held on 1 July 2007 with the most recent election in March 2012.
One senator represents the island in the French Senate. The first election was held on 21 September 2008 with the last election in September 2014. St. Barthélemy became an overseas territory of the European Union on 1 January 2012, but the island's inhabitants remain French citizens with EU status holding EU passports. France is responsible for the defence of the island and as such has stationed a security force on the island comprising six policemen and thirteen gendarmes (posted on two-year term).The French State is represented by a prefect appointed by the president on the advice of the Minister of the Interior. As a collectivity of France, the island's national anthem is La Marseillaise.


=== Heraldry ===

The coat of arms of Saint Barthélemy is a shield divided into three horizontal stripes, three gold fleurs-de-lis on blue, above a white Maltese cross on red, over three gold crowns on blue, and reads "Ouanalao". On a white background, it serves as the unofficial Flag of Saint Barthélemy.


=== Legal profession ===
Although the Bar of Guadeloupe, St Martin and St Barthelemy (Barreau de la Guadeloupe, St Martin et St Barthélemy) exists, there is no clear indication as to how demographic groups, such as women, have fared in the legal field. 
