
== Government and politics ==

The People's Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ) is the ruling party in Eritrea. Other political groups are not allowed to organize, although the unimplemented Constitution of 1997 provides for the existence of multi-party politics. The National Assembly has 150 seats, of which 75 are occupied by the PFDJ. National elections have been periodically scheduled and cancelled; none have ever been held in the country. The president, Isaias Afwerki, has been in office since independence in 1993.


=== National elections ===
Eritrean National elections were set for 2001 but it was then decided that because 20% of Eritrea's land was under occupation, elections would be postponed until the resolution of the conflict with Ethiopia. However, local elections have continued in Eritrea. The most recent round of local government elections were held in 2010 and 2011. On further elections, the President's Chief of Staff, Yemane Gebremeskel said,
As yet, no national elections have been held since independence.


=== Military ===
The Eritrean Defence Forces are now the official armed forces of the State of Eritrea. Its constituent elements are Eritrean Ground Forces, Eritrean Navy, Eritrean Air Force (includes Air Defence Force). Eritrea's Army is well staffed, well trained, and compared to the vast majority of African armies, well-funded. Indeed, during Eritrea’s fight for independence from Ethiopia, the Eritrean military was widely admired as one of the most effective fighting organisations in the world.The EDF principles were articulated by the EPLF which during the liberation struggle operated a network of underground hospitals, factories, garages, and schools in the liberated areas it controlled while simultaneously engaging the Eritrean population at large in a social transformational change. At its peak, it commanded 90,000 battle hardened troops equipped with modern battlefield weapons captured from the Ethiopian occupying forces.

The Eritrean Defence Forces have also specific attributes due to high importance they attach to gender equality. This is another liberation struggle component integrated into modern day military forces of Eritrea. Eritrean women were integrated into the ranks of the freedom fighters and fought alongside the men on the front lines. They made up 30 percent of the country's combat forces. The EPLF treated women as equals, and they served as platoon commanders, commandos, assault troops, tank and truck drivers, mechanics, doctors, etc. Women also served in many non-combat capacities as teachers, paramedics, political organisers, technicians, garage mechanics, drivers and more. Eritrean women in villages across Eritrea and in the vast Eritrean Diaspora also organised to support the liberation movement.


=== National Service ===
The purposes of national service (Hagerawi Agelglot) in Eritrea are clearly stated in a legal proclamation 82/1995 of 1995 and are three-fold: national defence, economic and social development and national integration. Its overall aim is not only to defend the country, but also to rebuild it following the war of independence and to propagate the national ideology (National service is the “school of the nation”).
The Eritrean national service has a military branch and a civilian branch. Individuals assigned to the military branch perform their service within the Eritrean military (army, navy or air force). They are also sometimes deployed for specific projects, predominantly projects to develop the country's infrastructure and within the agricultural sector. They live on military bases and are divided into units. Administration of the military branch is a matter for the Ministry of Defence.
Those assigned to the civilian branch perform their service by participating in civilian projects. For that purpose, the government assigns individuals to different ministries. Those individuals are usually well-educated people or have specialist skills. They are typically deployed in schools and courts or provide medical care. Individuals performing national service undertake the duties assigned to them as they would in a normal job. They live with their parents, families or in private accommodation at their workplace. 
Following the outbreak of the border war with Ethiopia, Eritrea announced the general mobilisation of its forces, as a result of which the Proclamation Article 21(1) was triggered. Despite the end of combat operations in 2000, Ethiopia – unlike Eritrea – has never recognised the border drawn by the UN Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission ruling in 2002. Accordingly, the Eritrean government has not lifted the extension of National Service beyond its statutory peace-time duration of 18 months.  The GOE had launched a massive demobilization programme – funded by its international partners in 2001. But the demobilization programme was stopped in 2005 when Ethiopia officially and categorically rejected the EEBC Award and virtually created a situation of war with Eritrea.
In March 2018, the Eritrean authorities confirmed that the Government has introduced a new improved salary scale for national service which was being implemented in phases. The beneficiaries of the first phase were the new national service members enrolled in the civil service and in the army. New baseline salary is 1800 nakfa for those without secondary education. 2,500 nakfa for Post-secondary certificate holders, 3,000 nakfa for those with a diploma, 3,500 nakfa for first degree holders and for advanced degrees of five years or more 4,000 nakfa. The second phase of the salary scale and with retroactive applicability is to be introduced for existing members of the civil service and new entrants with second degrees and PhDs. In this sense it seems that Government is trying to address disparity and imbalance and increase in the previous salary scales.


=== Legal profession ===
The Eritrean judiciary can be divided into Civil, Military and Special Courts. The jurisdictional paths of these Courts do cross each other, but each is subject to different administrative structure. The Courts also differ in the type of law they use. 
The Community Courts of Eritrea are the foundation of the judicial system in Eritrea. The courts typically hear cases regarding minor infractions, typically involving sums of less than approximately $7,300 (100 thousand nakfa). Individual cases are heard by an individual magistrate. Defence counsels are permitted to present cases but are typically appointed by the court because defendants are rarely able to meet the cost of private representation.
The system was set in place with the aim of ensuring better access to the legal system to all layers of the society and has helped increase the share of cases resolved outside of the court through mediation and compromise with the involvement of representatives of family members known as shimagle. Between 2004-2009, about 57% of cases were settled through mediation and compensation among the litigants.The Community Court's standing on women in the legal profession is unclear, but elected women judges have reserved seat. Furthermore, even though there is no empirical data to show the impact of the Court on gender equality the election of women judges is believed to have positively contributed to change of the traditional role of women in Eritrea. Community court judges are elected by their community initially for two years and now it has changed into four years. Most of the judges are elders who have adequate knowledge of customary practices but also the national law. They must also be active participants in the affairs of their community. The three members of the bench are traditionally distinguished as one judge and two nebaro. The nebaro have the role in assisting the ‘main’ judge by using their knowledge of customs and of the community.
According to the NYU School of Law, the Legal Committee of the Ministry of Justice oversees the admission and requirements to practice law in Eritrea. Although the establishment of an independent bar association is not proscribed under Proclamation 88/96, among other domestic laws, there is no bar association. The community electorate in the local jurisdiction of the Community Court chooses the Court's judges. The Community Court's standing on women in the legal profession is unclear, but elected women judges have reserved seat.
