Estonia (Estonian: Eesti [ˈeːsti] ( listen)), officially the Republic of Estonia (Estonian: Eesti Vabariik), is a sovereign state in Northern Europe. It is bordered to the north by the Gulf of Finland with Finland on the other side, to the west by the Baltic Sea with Sweden to the west, to the south by Latvia (343 km), and to the east by Lake Peipus and Russia (338.6 km). The territory of Estonia consists of a mainland and 2,222 islands in the Baltic Sea, covering a total area of 45,227 km2 (17,462 sq mi), water 2,839 km2 (1,096 sq mi), land area 42,388 km2 (16,366 sq mi), and is influenced by a humid continental climate. Ethnic Estonians, a Finnic people, are the largest ethnic group, followed by a significant Russian minority.
The territory of Estonia has been inhabited since at least 9,000 BC. Ancient Estonians were some of the last European pagans to be Christianized, following the crusade in the 13th century. After centuries of successive German, Danish, Swedish, and Russian rule, a distinct Estonian national identity began to emerge the 19th and early 20th centuries. This culminated in a declaration of independence from the Russian Empire, which was secured in 1918 following  War of Independence. Initially democratic, Estonia became autocratic in 1934 during the Era of Silence. During World War II, Estonia was repeatedly occupied by Soviet Union and Nazi Germany, ultimately being incorporated by Soviets as the Estonian SSR. After the loss of its de facto independence, Estonia's de jure state continuity was preserved by diplomats and government in exile. In 1987 the peaceful Singing Revolution against Soviet rule began, resulting in the restoration of de facto independence on 20 August 1991. 
Since independence in the late 20th century, Estonia has been a democratic unitary parliamentary republic divided into fifteen counties. Its capital and largest city is Tallinn. With a population of 1.3 million, it is one of the least-populous member states of the European Union, Eurozone, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Schengen Area, and of NATO. It is a developed country with an advanced, high-income economy that has been among the fastest-growing in the EU. It ranks very high in the Human Development Index, and performs favourably in measurements of economic freedom, civil liberties, education, and press freedom (third in the world in 2012 and 2007). Estonian citizens are provided with universal health care, free education, and the longest-paid maternity leave in the OECD. One of the world's most digitally advanced societies,  in 2005 Estonia became the first state to hold elections over the Internet, and in 2014 the first state to provide e-residency.
