
== Demographics ==

The 2010 census recorded Indonesia's population as 237.6 million, with high population growth at 1.9%. 58% of the population lives in Java, the world's most populous island. The population density is 138 people per km2 (357 per sq mi), ranking 88th in the world, although Java has a population density of 1,067 people per km2 (2,435 per sq mi). The population is unevenly spread throughout the islands within a variety of habitats and levels of development, ranging from the megalopolis of Jakarta to uncontacted tribes in Papua. In 1961, the first post-colonial census gave a total population of 97 million. The country currently possess a relatively young population, with a median age of 28.6 years (2016 estimate). The population is expected to grow to around 295 million by 2030 and 321 million by 2050. Around 2 to 8 million Indonesians live overseas, with most of them settled in Malaysia, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Hong Kong, Singapore, the United States, and Australia.


=== Ethnicity and language ===

Indonesia is a very ethnically diverse country, with around 300 distinct native ethnic groups. Most Indonesians are descended from Austronesian-speaking peoples whose languages can be traced to Proto-Austronesian, which possibly originated in prehistoric Taiwan. Another major grouping are the Melanesians, who inhabit eastern Indonesia. The Javanese are the largest ethnic group, comprising 40.2% of the population. They are predominantly located in the central to eastern parts of Java and also significant numbers in most provinces of Indonesia. The Sundanese, Batak and Madurese are the largest non-Javanese groups. A sense of Indonesian nationhood exists alongside strong regional identities.

More than 742 different languages and dialects are spoken in the country. Some belong to the Austronesian language family, while over 270 Papuan languages are spoken in eastern Indonesia (Maluku Islands and Western New Guinea). The official language is Indonesian, a variant of Malay based on its prestige dialect, which for centuries had been the lingua franca of the archipelago. It was promoted by nationalists in the 1920s, and declared the official language under the name Bahasa Indonesia in 1945. The language has experienced centuries of local and foreign influences, including from Javanese, Sundanese, Minangkabau, Hindi, Sanskrit, Chinese, Arabic, Dutch, Portuguese and English. Nearly every Indonesian speaks the language due to its widespread use in education, academics, communications, business, politics, and mass media, albeit as a second language; the first language being the local ones, of which Javanese is the most widely spoken.In 1930, Dutch and other Europeans (Totok), Eurasians, and derivative people like the Indos, numbered 240,000 or 0.4% of the total population. Historically, they constituted only a tiny fraction of the native population and continue to do so today. Despite the Dutch presence for almost 350 years, the Dutch language has no official status and the small minority that can speak the language fluently are either educated members of the oldest generation, or employed in the legal profession, as certain law codes are still only available in Dutch.


=== Urban centres ===


=== Religion ===

While religious freedom is stipulated in the constitution, the government officially recognises only six religions: Islam, Protestantism, Roman Catholicism, Hinduism, Buddhism, and Confucianism; although indigenous faiths are also recognised. Indonesia is the world's most populous Muslim-majority country with 227 million adherents in 2017, with the majority being Sunnis (99%). The Shias and Ahmadis respectively constitute 0.5% and 0.2% of the Muslim population.Christians made up almost 10% of the population (7% Protestant, 2.9% Roman Catholic), 1.6% were Hindu, and 0.8% were Buddhist or other. Most Indonesian Hindus are Balinese, and most Buddhists in the country are ethnic Chinese.

Prior to the arrival of Hinduism, Buddhism and Abrahamic religions, the natives of the archipelago practiced indigenous animism and dynamism, beliefs that are common to Austronesian people. They venerated and revered ancestral spirit, and believed that supernatural spirits (known as hyang) may inhabit certain places such as large trees, stones, forests, mountains, or sacred places. Examples of Indonesian native belief systems include the Sundanese Sunda Wiwitan, Dayak's Kaharingan, Torajan Aluk' To Dolo, Manusela and Nuaulu's Naurus, Batak's Parmalim faith, and the Javanese Kejawèn. These native customs and beliefs had significant impact on how other faiths are practiced, evidenced by a large proportion of people—such as the Javanese abangan, Balinese Hindus, and Dayak Christians—practicing a less orthodox, syncretic form of their religion.Hindu influences reached the archipelago as early as the first century CE. Around 130, a Sundanese kingdom named Salakanagara emerged in western Java, and is the first historically recorded Indianised kingdom in the archipelago, created by an Indian trader after marrying a local Sundanese princess. Arriving around the sixth century, the history of Buddhism in Indonesia is closely related to that of Hinduism, as a number of empires based on Buddhist culture were established around the same period. The archipelago has witnessed the rise and fall of powerful and influential Hindu and Buddhist empires such as Majapahit, Sailendra, Srivijaya and Mataram. Though no longer a majority, Hinduism and Buddhism remain defining influences in Indonesian culture.

Islam was introduced to the archipelago by Sunni traders of the Shafi‘i school of jurisprudence, as well as Sufi traders from the Indian subcontinent and southern Arabian peninsula. The spread of the religion was accelerated by missionary works, such as by the Wali Sanga and Chinese explorer Zheng He, and military campaigns by several sultanates.  For the most part, Islam overlaid and mixed with non-Islamic cultural and religious influences that resulted in a distinct form of Islam, particularly when compared to practices of the religion in the Middle East. Trends of thought within Islam in the country can be broadly categorized into two orientations; "modernism" which closely adheres to orthodoxy while embracing modern learning, and "traditionalism" which tends to follow the interpretations of local religious leaders and teachers at Islamic boarding schools (pesantren), that are supported by Indonesia's two largest Islamic civil society groups Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul Ulama respectively.

Catholicism was brought to the archipelago by early Portuguese traders and missionaries such as Jesuit Francis Xavier, who visited the archipelago and baptised several thousand locals. The spread of Catholicism faced difficulty due to the VOC policy of banning the religion and the Dutch hostility towards it due to the Eighty Years War against Catholic Spain's rule. In present-day Flores, the royal house of Larantuka formed the only native Catholic kingdom in Southeast Asia, with the first king named Lorenzo. Protestantism is largely a result of Calvinist and Lutheran missionary efforts during the Dutch colonial era. Although the Calvinist and Lutheran branch are the most common, a multitude of other denominations can be found elsewhere in Indonesia. The Batak Protestant Christian Church, founded in 1861 by German Lutheran missionary Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen, is the largest one.


=== Education and health ===

Education in Indonesia is compulsory for twelve years, and the constitution dictates that 20% of the national budget is to be prioritised for education. Parents can choose between state-run, non sectarian public schools supervised by the Ministry of Education and Culture or private or semi-private religious (usually Islamic) schools supervised and financed by the Department of Religious Affairs. Private international schools, which are not based on the national curriculum, are also available. The enrolment rate is 90% for primary education (2015), 76% for secondary education, and 24% for tertiary education. The literacy rate is 95.22% (2016) and the government spends 3.59% of GDP (2015) on education. By 2014, there were 118 state universities and 1,890 private higher educational institutions in Indonesia. According to the 2018 QS World University Rankings, the top universities in the country are University of Indonesia (#292), Bandung Institute of Technology (#359) and Gadjah Mada University (#391). All of them are located in Java. Andalas University is pioneering the establishment of a leading university outside of Java.Government expenditure on healthcare is about 2.98% of GDP in 2017 and is expected to increase by 11.7% a year and reach US$47.1 billion by 2022. Citizens are protected under the National Health Insurance (Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional, JKN), a scheme to implement universal health care launched in 2014. Under JKN, citizens will receive coverage for a range of health services from public as well as private firms that have opted to join the scheme. Although health indicators have significantly improved in recent decades such as life expectancy (from 63 in 1990 to 71 in 2012) and declining child mortality (from 84 deaths per 1,000 births in 1990 to 27 deaths in 2015), Indonesia continues to face health challenges that include maternal and child health, low air quality, malnutrition, high rate of smoking, and communicable diseases.


=== Issues ===

Close to 80% of Indonesia's population lives in the western parts of the archipelago, but they are growing at a slower pace than the rest of the country. This has created a gap in wealth, unemployment rate, and health between densely populated islands and economic centres (such as Sumatra and Java) and sparsely populated, disadvantaged areas (such as Maluku and Papua). Racism, especially against Chinese Indonesians since the colonial period, still continues to date. Religious intolerance has long been a feature of the country's society. In 2017, the Chinese Christian governor of Jakarta Basuki Tjahaja Purnama was sentenced to two years in prison after being found guilty of blasphemy. LGBT issues have recently gained attention in Indonesia. While homosexuality is legal in most parts of the country, it is illegal in Aceh and South Sumatra. LGBT people and activists have regularly faced fierce opposition, intimidation, and discrimination, launched even by authorities.
