
== Geography ==

Albania occupies the southwestern portion of the Balkan Peninsula. The country is located in Southeastern and Southern Europe, with Montenegro bordering to the northwest, Kosovo to the northeast, Macedonia to the east and Greece to the south. The Mediterranean Sea make up the entire west border of Albania. The country lies mostly between latitudes 42° and 39° N, and longitudes 21° and 19° E. Its territory covers 28,748 square kilometres (11,100 square miles). By territory, Albania is the 14th largest country in the mediterranean and the 145th largest country in the world. It's coastline length is 476 km (296 mi) and extends along the Adriatic and Ionian Seas, both within the Mediterranean Sea.Albania's northernmost point is Vërmosh at 42° 35' 34" northern latitude; the southernmost is Konispol at 39° 40' 0" northern latitude; the westernmost point is Sazan Island at 19° 16' 50" eastern longitude; and the easternmost point is Vërnik at 21° 1' 26" eastern longitude. The highest natural point is Mount Korab, standing at 2,764 metres (9,068.24 ft) above the Adriatic. The lowest natural point is the Adriatic Sea, at 0 metres (0.00 ft). The distance from east to west is 148 kilometres (92 mi), from north to south 340 kilometres (211 mi).

Despite its small size, Albania is dominated by mountainous or high terrain, with a wide variety of natural features including valleys, plains, canyons and caves. Topographically, the mountains run the length of the country from north to south; the Albanian Alps in the north, Sharr Mountains in the northeast, Skanderbeg Mountains in the center, Korab Mountains in the east, Pindus Mountains in the southeast and the Ceraunian Mountains in the southwest along the Albanian Riviera.
The hydrographic network of Albania includes several of the largest and most ancient bodies of fresh water in Southern Europe. Lake Shkodër is the largest lake, situated in the northwest with a surface which can vary between 370 km2 (140 sq mi) and 530 km2 (200 sq mi), out of which one third belongs to Albania and the rest to Montenegro. It is the largest lake in Southern Europe. Lake Ohrid in the southeast is shared with Macedonia and is one of the most ancient lakes in the world. Lake Prespa at the border triangle with Macedonia and Greece is one of the highest tectonic lakes within the Balkan Peninsula at 853 metres (2,799 ft) above the Adriatic.


=== Climate ===

Albania comprises a wide range of climatic conditions across its small territory and varied topography, although most of the country experiences mediterranean climate, characterised by mild winters and hot, dry summers. As defined by the Köppen climate classification, the country hosts five major climatic subtypes, including mediterranean, subtropical, oceanic, continental and subarctic. Between the north and south, the west and east there can be a considerable difference in climate.In general, northern parts of the country are characterized by cold winters and cool summers, while the southern parts by predominantly mild wet winters and very hot, dry summers. The highest temperature of 43.9 °C (111.0 °F) was recorded in Kuçovë on 18 July 1973 and the lowest temperature of −29 °C (−20 °F) was registered in the village of Shtyllë, Librazhd on 9 January 2017.The climate in the lowlands is typically mediterranean, while in the hinterlands it is continental. The warmest areas of the country are at the Adriatic and Ionian coast in the lowlands, where climate is profoundly affected by the sea.  The coldest parts of the country are at the northern and eastern hinterlands, where snowy forested climate is prevalent in the areas above 1,500 metres (4,900 feet) above the Adriatic.  Temperature is affected more by differences in longitude than by latitude or any other factor. Average summer temperatures are lower in the hinterlands than in the lowlands, but daily fluctuations are greater. The mean monthly temperature ranges between −1 °C (30 °F) in winter and 21.8 °C (71.2 °F) in summer.

The average precipitation in Albania is about 1,485 millimetres (58.5 inches). The country receives most of the precipitation during winter months and less during summer months. The mean annual precipitation ranges between 600 millimetres (24 inches) and 3,000 millimetres (120 inches) depending on geographic region. Due to the high altitude, the northwestern and southeastern hinterlands receives the higher amount of precipitation, while the northeastern, southwestern hinterlands and western lowlands the smaller amount of precipitation. The Albanian Alps are considered among the wettest areas in Europe, receiving 3,100 mm (122.0 in) of rain annually. An expedition from the University of Colorado discovered four small glaciers inside the Albanian Alps. The glaciers are at the relatively low level of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft), almost unique for such a southerly latitude.Snow falls regularly in winter in the interior of the country, particularly on the mountains in the north and east, including the Albanian Alps and Korab Mountains. Moreover, snow also falls on the coastal areas in the southwest almost every winter such as in the Ceraunian Mountains, where it can lie even beyond March.


=== Biodiversity ===

Even though small in size, Albania is distinguished by exceptionally rich and varied biodiversity. The country is host to 30% of the entire flora and 42% of fauna of Europe. Phytogeographically, Albania straddles the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. The country falls within four terrestrial ecoregions of the Palearctic ecozone including the Illyrian deciduous forests, Balkan mixed forests, Pindus Mountains mixed forests and Dinaric Alpine mixed forests. The country's biodiversity is conserved in 14 national parks, 1 marine park, 4 ramsar sites, 1 biosphere reserve, 45 important plant areas, 16 important bird areas and 786 protected areas of various caterogies.
Albania has about 4,312 square kilometres (1,665 square miles) of pasture land and 10,000 square kilometres (3,861 square miles) of forest land, which is characteristically rich in flora.
About 3,000 different species of plants can be found in the country, many of which are often used for medicinal purposes. The coastal regions and lowlands have typical Mediterranean macchia vegetation, whereas oak forests and vegetation are found at higher elevations. Vast forests of pine, beech and fir are found on higher mountains such as in the Albanian Alps and Korab Mountains. Alpine grasslands grow at elevations above 1,800 metres (5,900 feet).

About 58 species of mammal and 353 species of birds occur in the country. Gray wolves, red foxes, brown bears, wild boars and chamoises are few of the primary large mammals. Lynxes, wildcats, pine martens and polecats are rare, but still survive distributed throughout the country. Some of the most significant bird species found in the country include various bird of prey, vulture, grouse and waterfowl species. The golden eagle is both the national animal and national symbol of Albania. There are some 91 globally threatened species found within the country, most notable amongst them the dalmatian pelican, pygmy cormorant and european sea sturgeon. The rocky coastal regions in the south provide good habitats for the endangered mediterranean monk seal and short-beaked common dolphin.
Albania had an outstanding performance in the 2010 Environmental Performance Index, ranking 23th out of 163 countries in the world. In 2012, the country advanced from 23th to 15th, whereas it had the highest ranking in South and Eastern Europe and Central Asia. The country was the 24th greenest country in the world according to the 2005 Environmental Sustainability Index. Nevertheless, for 2016, the country was ranked the 13th best performing country on the Happy Planet Index by the United Nations.
