
== Sustainability ==

Eritrea’s development aspiration is to achieve rapid, balanced and sustainable economic growth with social equity and justice. Using an approach anchored in the self-reliance principle, the Government is leading this development course, with the ongoing external support and cooperation of development partners such as the United Nations (UN).On the social front, Eritrea is among the few African countries on track to meet the health-related MDGs, including reducing child and maternal mortality. School enrolment has increased in recent years following a decline from 2005 to 2010, especially among girls and children living in hard-to-reach areas, but high youth unemployment remains a concern. In addition, while the Government has demonstrated a commitment to promoting gender equality, additional work is needed to fully integrate gender issues into national development policies/strategies. However, achievements made so far were judged as commendable by UN representatives present in the country.

Eritrea has made considerable progress towards providing equitable, accessible and affordable health services to the majority of the population and as a result managed to reach seven of eight MDGs by December 31, 2015 deadline. The Millennium Development Goals Agenda were succeeded by the Sustainable Development Goals Agenda (SDGs) beginning January 1, 2016, and following that Eritrea prepared a roadmap for achieving 2030 Sustainable Development Goals. The Eritrean Government stated it considers SDGs congruent with Eritrea’s development aspirations and stated it will continue staying on target pertaining to poverty eradication, eliminating inequalities of opportunity between genders, and disparities between segments of the population and among cities and regions of the country.
Eritrea made considerable gains towards increasing school enrolment following independence. The net enrolment rate increased from 34.8 per cent in 1991/1992 to 76.8 per cent in 2011/2012. The UN in Eritrea is helping the Government continue to increase school enrolment, participation, learning and completion of basic education. Government advocates sustainable development approach which is anchored on, self-reliance and ownership of policies and programs which emphasise the effective utilisation of national human and material resources before seeking external assistance or cooperation. Same principles are applied in regards to foreign investments which are welcome under strict conditions for investment including the promotion of local employment, training and a joint venture with national companies (ENAMCO). In that sense, integrating local communities throughout the whole process from prospecting, exploration to actual production is mandatory.

By ensuring that any company follows the Government of Eritrea Impact Review Committee to ensure that mining companies maintain a high standard of operational governance as a mandatory pre-requisite for any company wishing to operate in Eritrea. The robust environmental protection program is also one of the imperatives for companies to acquire their license to operate and similar regulations apply in regard to ensuring the safety and wellbeing of employees. For instance, if any part of the village land falls under the exploration sites, compensation or agricultural assistance are provided including machinery and/or training on labour-intensive production. As a result, local employees compete highly to get the chance to work for companies as the salary scale is higher than national average.
Eritrea is also actively pursuing reforestation policy enshrined in Proclamation No. 155/2006. During the course community based reforestation program launched in 2006 over 90 million tree seedlings have been planted in different areas covering over 30,000 hectares. Moreover, Eritrea also initiated activities aimed at developing seawater-based agriculture in an arid coastal zone. Eritrea is one of the few countries who formally instituted National Greening Day celebrated on May 15.In 2016, the Ministry of Agriculture decided on a set of priorities to improve the sustainability of agriculture in Eritrea. Important efforts include the development of water reservoirs and its accompanying infrastructure, mitigating pests and plant diseases, planting in accordance with predictable weather patterns, increasing biodiversity of planting sites, promoting crop rotation to help sustain soil quality and promoting sustainable energy to decrease traditional wood fire stove use.
