
== Demographics ==

Armenia has a population of 2,924,816 (2016 est.) and is the third most densely populated of the former Soviet republics. There has been a problem of population decline due to elevated levels of emigration after the break-up of the USSR. In the past years emigration levels have declined and some population growth is observed since 2012.

Armenia has a relatively large external diaspora (8 million by some estimates, greatly exceeding the 3 million population of Armenia itself), with communities existing across the globe. The largest Armenian communities outside of Armenia can be found in Russia, France, Iran, the United States, Georgia, Syria, Lebanon,
Australia, Canada, Greece, Cyprus, Israel, Poland, Ukraine and Brazil. 40,000 to 70,000 Armenians still live in Turkey (mostly in and around Istanbul).About 1,000 Armenians reside in the Armenian Quarter in the Old City of Jerusalem, a remnant of a once-larger community. Italy is home to the San Lazzaro degli Armeni, an island located in the Venetian Lagoon, which is completely occupied by a monastery run by the Mechitarists, an Armenian Catholic congregation. Approximately 139,000 Armenians live in the de facto independent country Republic of Artsakh where they form a majority.


=== Ethnic groups ===

Ethnic Armenians make up 98.1% of the population. Yazidis make up 1.2%, and Russians 0.4%. Other minorities include Assyrians, Ukrainians, Greeks (usually called Caucasus Greeks), Kurds, Georgians, Belarusians, and Jews. There are also smaller communities of Vlachs, Mordvins, Ossetians, Udis, and Tats. Minorities of Poles and Caucasus Germans also exist though they are heavily Russified. As of  2016, there are an estimated 35,000 Yazidis in Armenia.During the Soviet era, Azerbaijanis were historically the second largest population in the country (forming about 2.5% in 1989). However, due to the conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh, virtually all of them emigrated from Armenia to Azerbaijan. Conversely, Armenia received a large influx of Armenian refugees from Azerbaijan, thus giving Armenia a more homogeneous character.
According to Gallup research conducted in 2017 Armenia has one of the highest migrant acceptance (welcoming) rates in eastern Europe.


=== Languages ===

Armenian is the only official language. The main foreign languages that Armenians know are Russian and English. Due to its Soviet past, most of the old population can speak Russian quite well. According to a 2013 survey, 95% of Armenians said they had some knowledge of Russian (24% advanced, 59% intermediate) compared to 40% who said they knew some English (4% advanced, 16% intermediate and 20% beginner). However, more adults (50%) think that English should be taught in public secondary schools than those who prefer Russian (44%).


=== Cities ===


=== Religion ===

Armenia was the first nation to adopt Christianity as a state religion, an event traditionally dated to AD 301.The predominant religion in Armenia is Christianity. The roots of the Armenian Church go back to the 1st century. According to tradition, the Armenian Church was founded by two of Jesus' twelve apostles – Thaddaeus and Bartholomew – who preached Christianity in Armenia between AD 40–60. Because of these two founding apostles, the official name of the Armenian Church is Armenian Apostolic Church.
Over 93% of Armenian Christians belong to the Armenian Apostolic Church, a form of Oriental (Non-Chalcedonian) Orthodoxy, which is a very ritualistic, conservative church, roughly comparable to the Coptic and Syriac churches. The Armenian Apostolic Church is in communion only with a group of churches within Oriental Orthodoxy.
The Armenian Evangelical Church has a very sizeable and favourable presence among the life of Armenians with over several thousand members throughout the country. It traces its roots back to 1846 which was under patronage of the Armenian Patriarchate of Constantinople the aim of which was to train qualified clergy for the Armenian Apostolic Church.
Other Christian denominations practising faith based on Nicene Creed in Armenia are the Pentecostal branches of Protestant community such as the Word of Life, the Armenian Brotherhood Church, the Baptists which are known as of the oldest existing denominations in Armenia and were permitted by the authorities of Soviet Union, and Presbyterians.Catholics also exist in Armenia, both Latin rite and Armenian rite Catholics. The Mechitarists (also spelled "Mekhitarists" Armenian: Մխիթարեան), are a congregation of Benedictine monks of the Armenian Catholic Church founded in 1712 by Mekhitar of Sebaste. They are best known for their series of scholarly publications of ancient Armenian versions of otherwise lost ancient Greek texts.
The Armenian Catholic denomination is headquartered in Bzoummar, Lebanon.
Armenia is home to a Russian community of Molokans which practice a form of Spiritual Christianity originated from the Russian Orthodox Church.The Yazidis, who live in the western part of the country, practice Yazidism. As of  2016, the world's largest Yazidi temple is under construction in the small village of Aknalish. There are also Kurds who practice Sunni Islam.There is a Jewish community in Armenia diminished to 750 persons since independence with most emigrants leaving for Israel. There are currently two synagogues in Armenia – in the capital, Yerevan, and in the city of Sevan located near Lake Sevan.


=== Health ===
Vast improvements of health services occurred in the past decade. Such improvements consisted of easier accessibility to health-care services and an Open Enrollment program which allows Armenians to freely choose their healthcare service provider.Certified by World Health Organization Armenia was the first in European region and as of October 2017 is one of 10 countries worldwide (7 of which are islands) which proved to have eliminated mother-to-child HIV transmission.According to WHO data infant mortality rate nearly halved from 2002 to 2015.Health expenditures at 4.5% of GDP in 2014 were 3rd lowest in post-USSR countries and below the average of the region of Europe and Central Asia, same as in years 2006–2013. Health expenditures as percentage of government spendings were 4th lowest for the same group in 2008–2014, but beat peers in South Caucasus. Health expenditures in per capita terms (at PPP at constant 2005 USD) were nearly permanently 5th lowest in the above group in years 1999–2014. Out-of-pocket health expenditure were 4th highest in the same group in years 2003–2006 and 2010–2014. In 2014 4.3% of health expenditures came from sources outside of Armenia.Undernourishment at 6.3% in 2014 of population remained nearly unchanged since 2007.Obesity rate is 19.5% in Armenia in 2017, which is lower than in all regional countries and nearly all European countries.Tobacco policy in Armenia is as of February 2018 still very permissive with almost no enforcement of any smoke-restricting laws.
After significant decline crude in earlier decades crude birth rates remained at 13.0–14.2 per 1000 people nearly constant in years 1998–2015. In the same period crude death rate went from 8.6 to 9.3 per 1000 people. Note that crude rates are not age-adjusted.
Life expectancy at birth at 74.8 years was 4th highest among post-USSR countries in 2014.
