
== Education ==


=== Primary and secondary schools ===
Public schools include:
Primary:
Charles Leopold Bell School (Cole Bay)
Leonald Connor School (Cape Bay)
Martin Luther King, Jr. Primary School (Lower Princes Quarter)
Ruby Labega Primary (Retreat Estate)
Oranje School (Philipsburg)
Marie G. de Weever School (Hope Estate)
The sole public secondary school is the St. Maarten Vocational Training School in South Reward
Prins Willem Alexander School in St. Peters is the special education schoolPrivate schools subsidized by the St. Maarten government include:
Primary:
Hillside Christian School (St. Peters)
MAC Browlia F. Maillard Campus (Cul-de-Sac) and Rev. John A. Gumbs Campus (Betty's Estate)
Seven Day Adventist (Cole Bay)
Sr. Borgia Primary (Philipsburg)
Sr. Magda Primary (St. Peters)
Sr. Marie Laurence (Middle Region)
Sr. Regina Primary (Simpson Bay)
St. Dominic Primary (South Reward)
St. Joseph Primary (Philipsburg)
The Asha Stevens - Hillside Christian School (Cayhill)
Secondary:
Milton Peters College (South Reward) - Has HAVO, PKL, PBL, TKL, and VWO classes
St. Maarten Academy (Main campus in Cul-de-Sac, PSVE in Ebenezer)
Sundial School (Philipsburg)Previously residents had to complete secondary studies in Aruba and/or Curaçao. Prior to 1976 Sint Maarten had two secondary schools: the government secondary school John Phillips School and the Catholic secondary school Pastoor Nieuwen Huis School. Philips was both a MAVO/ETAO school while Huis was a MAVO school. The foundation Stichting Voortgezet Onderwijs van de Bovenwindse Eilanden (SVOBE), established on February 20, 1974, was created as the neutral governing body for a new school created by the merger of Phillips and Huis schools. MPC, the merged school, opened on August 17, 1976.The Caribbean International Academy, founded in 2003 is a preparatory private boarding and day school on the island of St. Maarten. Catering to children from Kindergarten to Grade 12, CIA is also the only school offering Canadian/Ontario High School Diploma (OSSD) and 90% of their graduates go on to attend universities in Europe, Canada and the United States.


=== Colleges and universities ===
Most residents who attend tertiary institutions do so in Curaçao and/or European Netherlands.The American University of the Caribbean School of Medicine (AUC), founded in 1978, was previously located on Montserrat. Because of the eruption of the Soufrière Hills volcano in 1995, AUC moved its campus to St. Maarten later that year. A permanent campus was completed in 1998 in Cupecoy.
The University of St. Martin (USM) was located in Philipsburg.
The University of Sint Eustatius School of Medicine, founded in 1999, was previously located on Sint Eustatius. In September 2013, the University of Sint Eustatius moved its campus to Cole Bay, St. Maarten.


=== Libraries ===
Philipsburg Jubilee Library is in Philipsburg.
